---
title: "Could AI wipe out humanity? | Most pressing problems"
channel: "80,000 Hours"
url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qzyEgZwfkKY"
---

A long time ago, the distant ancestors of humans were just one of a load of different apes, struggling for survival. Then, over millions of years of genetic mutations, we ended up getting quite big brains, and with them the ability to shape every corner of the world through tools, language, writing, science, technology, and civilisation… …and now all the other primates are in zoos, or what remains of the rapidly-dwindling wilderness.

Why is it that humans control the fate of the world, and chimpanzees… don't? You might have noticed in the news recently: Google, Microsoft and other tech companies are rapidly working to build advanced AI systems - artificial intelligence. Over the last few years, there's been pretty impressive progress in AI's ability to get stuff done. Being really, really good at getting stuff done is basically how humans have ended up shaping the world to fit our own needs and desires, and chimpanzees haven't. So as AI capabilities improve and companies and governments pump in billions of dollars a year… …it seems pretty plausible that in the coming decades, AI could radically transform our society, and potentially displace humans as the most powerful beings on the planet.

It's not hard to imagine how this might go badly. We've been telling stories about it forever: Terminator. 2001: A Space Odyssey. The Matrix. Bladerunner... the list goes on.

But that's just sci-fi right? Surely all the engineers actually working on AI in the real world think that these kinds of AI takeover scenarios are extremely unlikely? Unfortunately, that's not true. In a 2022 poll of hundreds of AI researchers, more than half of the respondents gave a greater than 5% chance that the outcome from AI would be "extremely bad (e.g. human extinction)". If that wasn't enough, in May 2023, hundreds of prominent AI scientists - including the leaders of OpenAI, Google DeepMind and Anthropic - signed a statement which said that "mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war."

So why do they think this? How could AI systems go from helping college students cheat on tests to posing a threat to humanity? Over the next 7 minutes, we're going to try to explain how this might happen. Inevitably, we'll be skipping over a lot of the technical details and complexity - but you can always read the 30,000 word article on our website for the full picture.

To begin, let's start with something that many people might not realise: the current wave of AI systems aren't really like conventional computer programs. In traditional software, every function is programmed by humans using explicit, step-by-step instructions. But current state-of-the-art AI systems aren't really like this. Instead, they're closer to black boxes - neural networks made up of hundreds of billions of parameters which arise from a training technique called stochastic gradient descent. So you can train it with a particular goal in mind, but there's no way to explicitly program an AI system's objectives, and it's extremely difficult to know exactly why a model has generated a specific output.

The reason this matters is that as AI systems get more and more capable, the worry is that they might try to gain power. Now hold on a second - an AI system is going to suddenly turn into a sci-fi supervillain and want to wipe out humanity? Isn't that just projecting human psychology onto machines? Not necessarily. Imagine you train a superintelligent AI system that has one task only: to make sure your daily coffee is on your desk each morning. This sounds fine right? This isn't a sci-fi movie - the AI system isn't going to suddenly develop a burning resentment towards you, or secretly dream of becoming a ballerina. It's not human! But like with playing chess or predicting the next word in a sentence, it will bring to its simple goal a superhuman level of competence, and that means it could naturally develop some secondary goals, without any explicit training.

Firstly, self-preservation: as computer scientist Stuart Russell puts it, you can't fetch the coffee if you're dead. Secondly, it's not going to want you - or anyone else - to change its goal. From the perspective of the AI system, the risk of you telling it to bring you a cup of Earl Grey instead, becomes an obstacle that could prevent it from achieving its original one and only goal: bringing you coffee. Thirdly, it will be able to predict that the more power and influence it has, the better it is likely to be at always achieving its primary goal. If it quietly takes over the world, it will be able to guarantee that your local Starbucks never runs out of flat whites.

The reality is, you don't have to be an evil mastermind to want to seek power: you just need an objective that involves shaping the world in a certain way. You don't need to 'hate' humans to be a threat to them - they just need to be in the way of your goals. Or in the way of your ability to completely control the flow of global coffee bean shipments.

And if you think that it would be intuitive for intelligent agents to automatically care for other intelligent beings… Well, just look at how we treat chimpanzees. Or chickens, or cows, or a large number of other human beings throughout history.

Okay, okay… but we're still talking about a computer program, right? Even if it had a reason to, how could a superintelligent AI system wipe out or disempower humanity? Quite a lot of ways, actually. It could engineer terrifying new bioweapons, or manipulate companies or governments. It could hack into our military technology, or any bank that uses digital systems (i.e. all of them), or really anything that depends on computers - which is most of our critical infrastructure.

Before we've even realised what's happening, we might wake up in the middle of the night to find that the city around us has gone dark, the whole internet is down, and our phones are dead in our hands.

But okay, this all still sounds a bit silly and abstract right? Maybe… it'll be fine. Maybe AI systems will naturally be docile or otherwise not power-seeking, or AI progress slows way down and ends up taking far longer than anyone currently expects. This is totally possible! Despite everything we've said, we do think it's more likely than not that there won't be a catastrophic AI takeover.

But even if AI systems don't develop their own power-seeking goals, there are still lots of other potential risks that need navigating. Advanced AI systems could end up being deployed by bad actors like rogue states, terrorists, or - if current hardware and efficiency trends continue - any teenager with a top of the range laptop and a jailbroken open-sourced model. AI could also make conflict between great powers more likely, develop dangerous new biotech, empower totalitarian governments, leave millions of people unemployed, deepen inequality, or allow for massive flooding of misinformation.

Let's be clear: everything is very uncertain; no one can know for sure how this completely novel technology will play out. But honestly that's part of why it's so scary. It's all very uncertain, and we're currently rushing into it. The people leading the top companies might like to be cautious, but they also face competitive pressures which push them to go faster.

If we get this right, the benefits could also be huge. Advanced AI could boost economic growth, speed up innovation, and help cure cancer. But remember, right now, no one fully understands how current AI systems generate their outputs, or how we can make sure they would never be inclined to seek power. And compared to the billions of dollars being spent on advancing AI capabilities every year, we estimated that in 2022, only around 400 people in the world were actively working on reducing the chances of an AI-related existential catastrophe.

But we also think that this is a solvable problem. Firstly, there's technical AI safety research. This is working on ways to ensure that AI systems aren't power-seeking or dangerous. For example, some engineers are trying to increase the interpretability of AI systems, so that we can better understand them. All the leading AI labs - as of right now - have teams dedicated to safety research, and there's real potential for them to make a big difference here.

Secondly, there's AI governance research and policy. This could involve developing policy ideas, creating new agencies, coordinating between different actors, and working with governments and the industry to establish a new regulatory framework, just like we have for the aviation industry or civilian nuclear technology. This has started ramping up a lot in 2023: regulation is being proposed, and politicians are meeting with AI lab leaders to discuss the potential risks.

The reality is, nobody knows how the next few years - or decades - will play out. But we shouldn't just cross our fingers and hope for the best. Right now, we think this is one of the world's most pressing problems, and right now could be a crucial moment to really do something about it… …before we find ourselves in the same position as the chimpanzees… …staring out through glass… …wondering where it all went wrong.

To read about this issue in more detail, find job openings in AI safety research or governance, or apply for a free 1-1 career advising call, check out our website: 80000hours.org
