---
title: "My TOP 5 Questioning Techniques for Teachers [Generate More Discussion & Debate in Your Lessons]"
channel: "Jonathan Sandling"
url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CaE_4NlNM74"
---

In this video I'll be sharing with you my top five questioning techniques that will help you to generate more discussion and more debate in your lessons. The five questioning techniques that I'll be covering are pose, pause, pounce and bounce, ABC questioning, EEAA questioning, Socratic questioning, and affective questioning. I'm going to be talking about how and when you can use these techniques in your lessons. So without further ado, let's do.

My name is Jonathan Sandling. If you're new to my channel, welcome. If you're returning to my channel, welcome back.

There are many questioning techniques available for teachers, but here are four main reasons why these five questioning techniques have made my top five list. Firstly, they're simple and easy to remember. Secondly, they're highly versatile techniques that can be used at any point in the lesson and for almost any subject and stage of learning. They can be used with very minimal preparation and can really be used ad hoc within the lesson as and when discussions are occurring. And lastly, most importantly, they are highly effective at generating new thinking, new learning, and pushing more depth in discussion and debate.

So the first questioning technique we're going to look at is pose, pause, pounce and bounce. This is a teaching classic, so everyone should have this in their questioning toolkit. As a teacher, you start by posing a question. You then pause and allow enough wait time for students to think and provide an answer. Once students have had time to think, you then pounce on a student for an answer, and then you bounce their answer to another student.

The sequence of pose, pause, pounce and bounce is quite important, so let's look at each one of these stages individually. When posing a question, it's important to ask a question which is open-ended, one that allows students to provide different perspectives and ideas on the topic being discussed. For example, should wild animals be kept in zoos? Is capitalism a force for good? Or why are superhero movies so popular?

Once you've posed a question, it's then important to pause and allow enough time for students to think and provide a response. This is generally termed as wait time. This term was coined by a researcher called Mary Budd Rowe in 1972. She looked at the amount of time teachers gave following asking a question for students to provide a response, and Rowe was surprised by her findings in that she found the average wait time provided by teachers was only one and a half seconds. And more worrying than this, she even found an example of wait time being one-tenth of a second. Although this research was conducted in the 1970s, similar observational research has been conducted over recent decades finding similar results. So this aspect of pausing and allowing students time to think and provide a response is a really crucial part of the strategy.

Once you've allowed sufficient time for students to provide a response, it's then a case of pouncing on a student for an answer. In fact, the thought of pouncing on a student is actually terrifying for both the teacher and the student. However, it's clearly only in this strategy because pounce rhymes with bounce. So instead of pouncing on a student, we're looking at inviting an appropriate student to provide an initial response to the question, and this is where the discussion and debate can begin.

Once an initial response has been provided by the student, we're then in a position to bounce that to another student to get their input and ideas around the same topic. This then allows you to get different viewpoints, different perspectives, and different ideas on the same topic from different students. But this strategy doesn't end there. It's ultimately up to you as a teacher to decide how you want to progress this activity. Once you've got a discussion and debate underway, you could just continue to pounce and bounce questions back and forth around the group to keep the discussion going. Alternatively, you could stop the discussion, pose a new question, allow wait time, and get more discussion and debate going to take that discussion in a different direction.

Questioning strategy number two is ABC questioning. ABC questioning stands for agree, build and challenge. Now this is another absolute go-to questioning technique that all teachers should be aware of. It's really simple to use but highly effective. So let's talk about how this works.

When conducting a question and answer session in your lessons, you can ask students if they agree with each other's points of view, whether they can build upon each other's ideas or thoughts, or whether they would like to challenge each other's ideas in a constructive way.

To help demonstrate how ABC questioning can be used in your lessons, I'm going to use an example to do that. This example will be: what qualities make a good citizen? Let's say the first student that responds suggests kindness is a quality they would expect to see in a good citizen. You can then ask the rest of the group if they agree with that student's opinion, and in doing so you would expect students to be able to provide rationale or justification as to why they agree with that opinion.

You can also ask students if they would like to build upon the idea of kindness being a quality of a good citizen. This could be done by another student providing more information on why kindness is an important quality of a good citizen. All students could build more generally on the idea of what makes a good citizen by providing additional qualities for other students to consider. These might include tolerance, trustworthiness, honesty, morals, ethics, obeying the rule of law, and ambition. And by doing this, you enable students to collectively build and broaden their understanding of this particular topic.

And you can allow students the opportunity to challenge each other's answers. Let's use one of the qualities that was suggested in the building phase to explore that in a bit more detail. Let's select ambition. So a student may say, whilst ambition is an important quality for people to have, it isn't necessarily a key factor or key quality to be a good citizen. And as with the other two phases, you would expect students to provide some justification, rationale or explanation as to why they have that difference of opinion.

So you can see here that ABC questioning is a really simple but effective strategy to use to get students agreeing, building upon, and challenging each other's ideas. However, it needs to be done in a constructive way, and one of the key elements of this is making sure students are justifying and providing explanations and rationale for the decisions they're making.

The third questioning technique is EEAA questioning, and this stands for elaborate, evidence, arguments for, and arguments against. When having a discussion and debate within your class, you can ask students to elaborate on their answers. This is particularly relevant when students are providing an opinion or assumption around a particular topic. What do they mean by that? Why do they think that? Why is that important?

You can also ask students to provide evidence or examples as to why they think their opinion or attitude is correct. Can they find real world examples to back up the points they're making? And similarly, what evidence do they have to support their ideas and claims? Ideally, we'd be looking for students to draw information and evidence from different sources to triangulate their answer.

And you can also pose questions and bounce questions around the classroom to generate more depth and discussion around arguments for and arguments against the particular opinion, attitude or perspective that's being discussed.

So there are some similarities here between ABC questioning and EEAA questioning, but I would personally use these in a slightly different way. I typically tend to use ABC questioning when I'm introducing a new topic, to draw out prior knowledge and information, attitudes and opinions of students, so basically get a baseline understanding of their knowledge prior to delivering the topic. And I would tend to use EEAA questioning once students have a better, deeper, broader understanding of a topic, where more opinions and views and attitudes can be debated, and they're more well equipped to deal with arguments for and arguments against around that particular topic to demonstrate their understanding.

Questioning technique number four is Socratic questioning. Socratic questioning is actually a very detailed topic that's covered across many disciplines, from education to psychology to counselling. But in essence, and in the context of education, Socratic questioning is about probing students further to get more information and more richness in detail from them.

With the intention of simplifying Socratic questioning even further, there are four roles you can adopt within the classroom as a teacher which will allow you a practical framework to ask Socratic questions. These roles are the gadfly, the stingray, the midwife, and the ignoramus.

So you could be like a gadfly, asking more probing questions: why do you think that? Why is that important? Where's the evidence for that? Does that work in every situation? Can you apply that in the real world? By being a gadfly and chipping away at students, you can definitely dig deeper into their knowledge on a particular topic.

Alternatively, you could adopt a more supportive approach and take on the role of the midwife, where you are looking to give birth to new ideas. In this role, you'd be asking students questions which encourage them to think of new ideas, build upon ideas, and generate new ways of looking at the world.

The third role you could adopt is the stingray. This is where you administer a shock into discussion every now and again to challenge conventional ways of thinking. So you could ask questions such as: what if the opposite was true? What if that never existed? Or could you still achieve that if I removed this main element?

Or you could adopt the role of ignoramus. This one sadly comes quite naturally to me. As the ignoramus, she pretends to know absolutely nothing about the subject, asking students why, why is that the case, but how does that work, when could that be possible, tell me more about this. This is an effective strategy as it puts the student in the position of teacher and allows them the opportunity to teach you the subject.

The fifth questioning technique is the use of affective questions. So far we've looked at questioning techniques which are centred around information, facts, opinions and ideas. But by asking affective questions, it provides a new dimension by allowing us as teachers to ask students how the topic and discussions they're having relate to them on a more personal level. Affective questions allow students the opportunity to share their attitudes, feelings and values around a particular topic, and this is highly important because it allows students to engage with the learning on a much deeper, personal level.

Some examples of affective questions may include: how do you feel about that? Is that important to you? Does this perspective change your prior beliefs? How much do you value that answer? Does this new information change your attitude in any way?

Although I've presented these questioning techniques as five separate individual techniques, really they should be used in combination, and as a teacher you should have the ability to move between different techniques to get the best out of your students. For example, you could begin with pose, pause, pounce and bounce to start the discussion. You could then layer in around that some ABC questioning. You may want to use EEAA questioning. You could generate more Socratic questioning approaches, adopting the four roles. And you could make sure that you've got a mixture of affective questioning used within those different techniques.

If you found this video enjoyable and valuable, I'd very much appreciate it if you gave that like button a quick tappity tap and turned that thumb blue. And I make regular videos about teaching and some other stuff, so if you'd like to see more, please consider subscribing to my channel. My name is Jonathan Sandling. Ta-ta for now.
