---
title: "Keeping Participants Engaged"
channel: "Lens Academy"
url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u4UD8a0PYQQ"
---

So in this video I'm going to speak a little bit about how humans learn. The reason this can be so valuable as a facilitator is because often we're designing curriculum for a workshop or we're planning an event, and really understanding what people are drawn to and what keeps them engaged can help us plan and create better curriculum.

So the first principle we're going to look at is variety. Humans love variety. We love to switch it up. We like to change things. How boring would it be to have the same thing for dinner? Even seven days in a row, let alone 70. So the human nervous system is really drawn to variety. Obviously, if you have an exercise that people are doing with two people, we call that a dyad. You don't want to have three dyad exercises in a row. Often I'll have a dyad or a triad exercise followed by a big group exercise and kind of go back and forth, just using this principle of variety. Having one exercise that involves movement so people aren't sitting in chairs the whole time is a way to use this principle.

The second one is that the brain learns through surprise and it's put to sleep through repetition. If you notice skilled facilitators, they will vary their rate of speech. They'll talk really fast for a moment and then they'll slow down, and what that is is they're naturally speaking and engaging in a way that helps people pay attention. This is why humor is such a valuable skill for a facilitator, because humor works through surprise. And this is the main way that people will be like, "Oh, I need to pay attention right now."

So good facilitators will also share what's going to happen soon and what's going to happen next. If you're doing a full day workshop, you want to give an overview of the day, or if it's an evening, you want to tell people what to expect in the beginning. This really helps people relax. There's something where people will be scanning the environment, even subconsciously, to make sure things are okay — scanning for what's safe here, what's good here, how do I orient to this space. And as the facilitator, it's your job to help them relax those expectations and come more into the present moment. The main way to do this, or one simple way to do this, is to just talk about what's next: right now we're going to do this, soon after lunch we're going to do this other thing. I almost always say we're going to take a bathroom break in 15 minutes. What am I doing? I'm actually just giving people the permission to be like, "Oh, that's taken care of later on. I can actually focus here. I don't have to worry about when we're going to take a bathroom break." So that's a tangible example of talking about what's going to happen as a skillful facilitation principle.

The last one is that repetition and reviewing is your friend. When people are learning, when they're gaining value from an event, it's often one or max two things that they will take away and remember a month from now. So underlining the things, coming back to different themes, repeating the same thing in two different words — a lot of times I'll use synonyms when I'm talking. I'll be like, "This is a really subtle, gentle exercise," saying two adjectives right next to each other that kind of mean the same thing. So repeating things is okay. This is also because people have different learning styles. Some people may not pay attention to every single word, but if you say the same thing several different ways, you can actually speak to a larger group of people.
