---
title: "Leadership Perspectives"
channel: "Lens Academy"
url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aRYlpVkp02c"
---

This video is on different perspectives that you can source from in leadership. This is in the back of my mind pretty much anytime and anywhere I facilitate, because when something happens, it can be really hard to know what to do, especially if I freeze up. Okay, something occurred there. There's so much information coming in. Everyone's responding differently. I'm not sure what to do. Are we on track for the goal? What do I pay attention to? And this is kind of a map to help you know what to source from in the moment.

You don't have to pay attention to all of these, but if you check in on them, it can help you know where to look for information. I think one of the main differences between participants and leaders is that participants have to track two perspectives: their own experience and probably one other person's — whoever they know most in the group, whoever they see as the authority, whoever they're interacting with in that moment. Leaders and facilitators have to track four: your own experience, the experience of individuals in the group, the feeling of the group as a whole, and the wider context of what we're doing. Because really, your main job is to make sure that we get whatever goal accomplished we're going for, even if that goal is just connection.

One of the reasons I think it's complicated to be a leader is it's hard to keep all those things in your head at the same time. It takes a lot of practice. But the cool thing about it is you don't have to be in front of a room to do this. You could be out with friends and notice that there's someone in the group that hasn't spoken as much, or that everyone seems a little uncomfortable. Maybe we need to go out and get something to eat. Maybe we need to move because we've been sitting too long. Or everybody's together for someone's birthday and nobody's acknowledged the birthday person. That's a context shift. So you can actually be the one that's bringing about all sorts of change just by keeping these perspectives in mind. And we'll go through them one by one.

So first is the first person perspective, the "I." The I means that I'm sourcing from what's happening in me. What am I feeling? What do I know? What am I wanting? What's occurring on the inside. And that's a really important piece of information because if I'm not aware of myself, if I'm not fulfilled, if I'm not having fun or getting what I want from an experience, if I'm not aware of how I react, then it's not going to be a full experience. I'm not going to walk away feeling like I've done something that hits my soul. And for me at least, that really matters. So the first place you look is yourself.

Second person is other people in the group. If you're leading, how do individuals seem? Are they shifting? Are they still? Do they seem like they understood the instructions? What are their non-verbal communications? Does one person have their arms crossed and is leaning back? Even if everyone else is engaged, that has an impact on the group. And you might want to check in either in the moment or on a break. "Hey, what's happening for you? I noticed that you had your arms crossed." By the way, people often respond really well to knowing that they particularly were noticed. One of my teachers — one of his best techniques actually was he would remember things about people and he would call on them. He'd be like, "Hey, Gary, I know that you have a particular facility with dogs. I'm wondering if you could tell a story about that for the rest of the group, just to kind of cheer us up." Or he'd refer to things that happened before, like, "Hey, Mark, I'm remembering your comment from earlier. It was really helpful." And people when they felt singled out, it really changed how they responded, because you never knew when he was going to call on somebody, when he was going to acknowledge them. And he always did it in an appreciative way. So that's second person perspective, other.

Third person perspective is the group as a whole. If I'm in a room full of people and I feel a little bit on edge, just kind of uncomfortable, I don't quite know what to say, I'm probably picking up on some things that are going on in the room, not just in me. Sure, I might be nervous, but if it was a totally welcoming environment where everyone was chatting with each other, coming up to me, open body posture, I would probably actually feel comfortable even if I didn't know many people there. But a lot of the time, our systems are picking up on things that we're not even aware of because we're unconscious of it. And our unconscious mind picks up on a lot more than our conscious mind. So if I walk into a meeting and I all of a sudden feel uncomfortable and uncertain, that might mean that there's something unspoken in the room, or that people there aren't comfortable.

So you can actually use your sense of the room to give you information. Some main things I check in on are: are they talking with each other? Are they engaging freely, or are they sitting apart? Does their conversation seem stilted? That's something that could tell me that we're not quite settled yet, and I probably shouldn't give the group anything really deep to do or anything that involves a lot of interaction before I make sure that everyone's comfortable — before I maybe give them some exercises to connect, or have a conversation, or just talk some more until they open up. Or if everyone's really loose and comfortable, the opposite might be true. Maybe I plan to do a whole teaching piece, but instead I'm like, "Hey, let's break into pairs and just have everyone discuss the content instead." So, the way the room feels.

Another thing to pay attention to in the group is demographics. Who's the in-crowd and who's the out-crowd? Who knows whom? Because the people in the out-crowd may be a lot less comfortable. And you won't even necessarily know what their internal experience is unless you notice, "Wow, some people are all talking with each other and some people are on the outside of the group." Let me make sure that, for instance, everyone gets a chance to speak, or that I specifically welcome the people that seem to be in the out-group so they know someone is in the in-group with them, or they're basically in an in-group with me. Also racial, sexual, political, age demographics — these are all things that can have people feeling engaged or not engaged. It can affect how much people are speaking, how they're responding to others, whether or not they feel understood. So these are really important pieces of information to pay attention to at the group level. And again, even if you're out with a bunch of friends: who's on the inside, who's on the outside, and how do you want the makeup of the group to be? And can you change it by inviting people, by noticing things, by calling on others' wisdom.

So the last piece — fourth person perspective, what I call fourth person, is context or intention. Why are we here together? Does everybody know that? Is everybody actually enrolled in it? And then are we following on that track? Say I'm in a class and my intention is to teach math. And I'm going through the textbook and I see that the kids are disengaged and they seem to be having a hard time understanding the material. They're throwing things at each other. If my intention is actually to teach math, I am not teaching math right now. I am going through a textbook. And so I need to reorient. I need to find a different way of making sure that my goal of teaching math actually gets accomplished.

And I actually think context is the most important of these perspectives because it's always something I can come back to. It's my lifeline when everything else goes out the window. When I'm frozen and I can't think, when I don't know what's happening in the group, I can't read them. I'm disconnected from individuals. I feel like I'm on the outside. Oh, context, right? We're all supposed to be talking about how our day was. Or we're all supposed to be focusing on the brainstorming for the next project we're supposed to do. Even right now, actually talking about this, I'm like, right, I keep losing the thread because I'm nervous. Context. I'm going to be teaching about leadership perspectives so that people can use it in their life and in their leadership. Let me come back to examples about leadership and about life. Let me make sure that I'm giving ideas. The context is what I refer to.

So once again, four perspectives you can use: self, first person; other, second person; group, third person; and context, fourth person. Next time you're in a leadership situation, run through these and see what you notice and how it changes the way you're leading.
