---
title: "Opening the Event"
channel: "Lens Academy"
url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AJIwv5dLCTM"
---

This video is on opening an event. People often remember beginnings and endings more than almost anything else. So, how you open, how you spend those first couple seconds and first couple minutes is really pivotal to how people feel about the whole. So, in opening, your first objective is to help attendees feel welcome. Most people come into new situations with anxiety, and I found two major factors that settle anxiety.

First, knowledge. First part, who are you? People don't always know who the facilitator in the room is. And giving a little bit of an introduction or having someone else introduce you is a good way to gain trust and make yourself known right off the bat. Second, what are we doing? What are we here for? This both refocuses people's minds around the goal and it also helps relax them a little bit into knowing the nuts and bolts. Third, how long is it going to last? When are the breaks? Where are the bathrooms? The basic logistics that allow people to relax into, okay, this is how long I have to be sitting for. Who else is in the room? What different? Are managers present or just employees? Are there other teachers? Who are those people watching in the back? Are they staff? Are they witnesses? So, giving some orientation to the basic groups, if not the individuals.

And then what are the norms that I should follow? What are the agreements? The explicit context. There's a lot of implicit things in every room, what people think is acceptable behavior. But in most events we give some sort of general guidelines which helps people from many different cultures come into the same space. So, for instance, what's the balance of talking? When can you speak up and when should you stay silent? Do you have to raise your hand or not? When is it okay to go to the bathroom or get a drink? Is it something you can do at any time or should you wait for a break? These sorts of little touchpoints for people. If you're online, for instance, should you stay muted or unmuted the whole time? Is it okay to have your video off? Can you private message people? What can you put in chat? So, you're basically in knowledge trying to give people a bit of an orientation, like as if they were walking into a room and it's dark and they don't know where the objects are, but you've been in that room a hundred times and you know where everything is. You just have to orient them, like what could they bump their knee into that you want them to avoid, such that they can move smoothly through the room. They're always going to bump into things, but at least you can make the bruises better.

So, second piece is connection. Knowledge and connection. Connection is one that a lot of events miss at the very beginning because, especially in meetings for instance or in schools, we think that we can go straight from an introduction into getting people into work or into discussing a topic. And one of the organizations that I love, Matrix Leadership, has this idea of ground of health. It's basically psychological safety. It's knowing that you are accepted here and that people are maybe going to give you the benefit of the doubt if you mess up. So, it's trust through a sense of safety, and connection is one of the best ways to do this because a leader just speaking and saying it's safe or here are the rules — people still have a little bit of agitation like who else is in the room, unless they know each other really well. It's really helpful to give a space for people to see each other even. So whenever I do connection at the beginning, sometimes I want just two people to talk together for a while and clear things, and sometimes I want them to kind of just take a look around and see everybody in the room. So you really drop into who's here.

Connection can also be to the facilitator. You can reveal something about yourself, like why you were interested in doing this event in the first place, or where you're from or your personal story. Another thing, you can have participants connect with each other. You can do a small group conversation walking around, mingling, stop in front of someone, shake their hand. You can also do what's called a sentence stem. That's one of my favorite activities where you give a prompt that everybody answers. For instance, if I had a warning label today, it would read — and everyone goes around the group and they answer that. And by the end, you'll find that people are a little bit more grounded in. The last thing you can do is a connect-to-self meditation. So, basically, say, take a moment to do whatever you need to be present, or close your eyes and just take a second to ground into your body. Feel what it's like to be here.

I think I needed that too. So, revealing — in terms of timing, if you only have a short time, a connect-to-self meditation can be probably the fastest, or revealing something about yourself. And then if you have a little bit more time, giving everybody a chance to speak and get their voice into the room, even if it's just with a name or a bit of a deeper connection, so that they can relax. So, basically, during the introduction, tell people what you'll be doing and why. Share any norms of the space or the culture. Create a basic connection to the other people in the room, including the facilitators. And that's how you open an event.
