---
title: "Establishing Norms and Agreements"
channel: "Lens Academy"
url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MmdXHPqaJ7M"
---

This video is on norms and agreements. Basically, how to set a container that's safe for people where they know what to expect and have a chance to either buy into it or change it.

So first of all, why do we make norms or agreements in the first place? Well, everybody comes into a group with different preconceptions of what is normal and what is allowable. Maybe one person thinks that talking loudly and vehemently is a normal thing in this group, standing for one's opinion. And maybe someone else has trauma over people talking loudly. And in their experience, they exist within communities and spaces where people try to talk with understanding, a little quieter, leading with questions. Those two people in a group together, one of them is probably going to make the other wrong. Most likely, both of them are going to try to make each other wrong because our preconceptions show us what is safe, what is normal, and we don't always realize that other people can have different ones that aren't necessarily wrong.

Also in every group there are power and hierarchy roles and behavioral expectations. So who's leading and how much power do they have versus how do we want power to be dealt with? What do people expect of the leader, of each other, of themselves? How can people participate? What expectations do we have about each other's behavior? And all of these things, if we don't make some sort of shared agreement around how we're going to navigate them, it leads to a lot of conflict in the group that's really unnecessary. And usually we have to solve it interpersonally instead of structurally.

A lot of conflict can be avoided, or productive conflict can be had rather than unproductive conflict, by taking a little extra time to set a container, to speak to who we want to be together and what is and isn't normal. So the intention of setting norms is mostly so we can refer back to them. They're like mini goals for who we want to be together, and as such they can be immensely powerful in forming culture. I think of them more like cultural intentions than agreements. You could think of the Bill of Rights as a set of agreements that we make as a country together.

So let me give an example. A couple months ago I hosted a community builder potluck. It was the second time I'd run a potluck with that theme. And I thought I did a pretty good job setting expectations. I told people to bring a vegetable or an ingredient for stone soup and a question that was on their mind about community leadership. It was a free event and the guest list was limited to leaders. I allowed attendees to invite others who they saw as leaders too, so that we'd have a more eclectic group. The first time I ran this event, we had six attendees including my co-organizer and my housemate, and it was just a great conversation. We got to talk about a lot of things around community building that I really hadn't had peers around.

So this next one we did, 12 people showed up. We had political, social, business, and transformational community organizers. It was a really cool mix. We made soup, putting a stone in it, of course, and sat down for dinner. But once the conversation started, well, first of all, 12 was way too big a number for a productive semifacilitated conversation. I should have split us into two groups, one upstairs and one downstairs to limit noise pollution. Second, I didn't establish any cultural norms or power dynamics. I expected that a group of leaders would facilitate itself. I didn't take into account the fact that in a new group, even leaders are uncertain about stepping on each other's toes. So even when people seemed bored, they weren't challenging the conversation that was happening.

Everything might have still gone fine except for one problem. One woman in the group who I hadn't invited, so someone else must have, was breaking a ton of implicit cultural norms. She was speaking for longer than anyone else, and more than anyone but me. I was speaking too much, too, because I was nervous and trying to get things under control. When she offered opinions, they weren't her own. She was right at the beginning of building a community and she'd just been through a bunch of training courses which she was obviously excited about. So every time she spoke it was to give out bits of wisdom and stories she'd learned from her own teachers, not to explore something new or give a personal example.

So how did I know this was an issue? I knew she was breaking norms because I was frustrated and I could see that other people were less animated when she spoke. Oftentimes when people are uncomfortable, they get a little bit more still. Before the event, I didn't know that I had cultural norms or expectations on how people in the group should behave, but by breaking them, she illuminated them, and I'm grateful for that.

I realized I had a couple expectations for the group in order for it to fulfill its core intention of bringing community leaders together to share information and experiences. For example, the norms that I think I wish I should have set for this group and would in the future. First, everyone needs to have an active community that they're a leader in. Second, the discussion groups should be no larger than seven people, even if we have to break into two or three to make that happen. Third, one person should be empowered as facilitator. Part of my problem in this group was that I didn't have explicit power to moderate, so cutting people off was harder. Fourth, talk time should be shared relatively equally. And fifth, something like a norm: only share knowledge you've tested and be able to back it up. I'm still figuring that one out.

Basically, I needed norms for who was invited to the group, how large the groups would be, who was leading, and how we manage the type and flow of communication.

Norms differ for different events. Sometimes instead of giving my own I'll ask the group what principles, if any, would you like us to hold so that this space feels safe for you to participate in. I won't ask for everyone to agree to those principles. That kind of consensus building can take forever, but I'll write them up somewhere public so that we can allow them to inform us throughout the event.

One thing to remember: norms are only as useful as they are aligned to the goals of the event and the culture that already exists. Asking people to agree to a norm far outside their usual culture can be a recipe for disaster. For instance, asking a tightly wound hierarchical company to practice radical honesty is an agreement they'll either ignore or not ignore and risk breaking the core structure of their company. You may want the structure to change if it's ineffective or making people unhappy. But if you weren't hired to break it or don't have a plan for integrating the chaos, don't instigate it.

Also, this can be difficult, but try to be aware of your own implicit cultural biases. Let's say you want people to avoid giving advice, but you really like giving it, or you want the group to be inclusive, but you're really uncomfortable around cultures you didn't grow up in. If you're going to make an agreement, because people will follow what you do, the transmission, rather than what you say, the translation, make sure that you're willing to publicly work on your own behavior when it doesn't fit within the norm. This can actually be a really powerful way to change your own negative habits. Build a culture that doesn't contain them.

So, how to set a good agreement or norm? Define what you want the culture to be and what norms or agreements would lead to that. And for this it's really helpful to look at examples from other communities. It's really hard to make good norms because we don't know how they're going to play out long term. For instance, the norm or implicit agreement that the point of capitalism is to make as much money as possible has had a very long-term impact that some would argue is undesirable, even though it started as an attempt to increase commerce and actually create more of a flow within a country.

So secondly, it's important to make your agreement or norm clear and actionable. Define it to make sure that it is. Norms oftentimes can be implicit. You could be acting in a certain way and you don't always have to speak it unless push comes to shove. For instance, I didn't think I would have to speak that I was the leader of my community building group. But in fact, there were kind of two norms. One was that there was going to be a leader and one was that we were going to speak equally. Since I didn't speak to one of them, it was an issue in that case.

Agreements are spoken. They're things that we are saying verbally together so people can say yes or no. So for example, in terms of clear and actionable norms, telling people to respect yourself, take care of your own needs, it isn't going to do much if people can't recognize their needs or don't know how to take care of them, which is true for most of us, I would hazard. So for instance, you could say the norm is to respect ourselves, but the definition is take an extra moment to consider what you want if someone asks to partner with you before you give an answer to a question.

So you want to ideally not give more than five norms, ideally three or less, so people can remember them and make sure people are actually involved in using them. If you're in a shorter event and don't have much time, or in a community or business where the norms have been codified for a while, you'll probably have to go with the group's existing culture. Inertia is a thing and these norms will be interwoven into that culture. You don't want to change them unless you have a really good reason to.

So, you can name the agreements. Optionally, have people raise their hands if they agree. I don't really like going that way because it's social pressure. Most people find it very hard to not raise their hand if they're asked to and they look around and everyone else is doing it. And if they don't raise their hand, usually attention gets zeroed in on them like why didn't you raise your hand?

So I really like doing a thumb scale, for instance. Show your thumb to the extent that you are involved in doing this norm or agreement in the way it was presented. Like, this is yeah, I really want to keep that, that would be useful to me in the group. This is I really don't want to do that, it would be an issue for me. And you can see where it is in between and you can explore a little bit.

You can also ask for questions or objections to each thing you're saying without agreement. If you're in a group that's just beginning, whether it's a one-off weekend or an ongoing series, it can be good to have people help make the norms so that they understand them and are enrolled in them.

An intermediate level between those two is: if you don't have a ton of time, you can just have a discussion before making norms or agreements about what they are, why we would make them, and why we wouldn't, what they can kind of stand in the way of, just to keep those in mind. You want to refer back to the norms regularly so that people understand where and how they can be used. For instance, if you have a norm of step up, step back, when somebody speaks, if they've spoken a couple times, you could say, remember the norm we have of step up, step back. I'd love you to pass the ball to someone else to speak.

In general, norms and agreements are super powerful for forming culture. Consider them carefully, use them sparingly, and consider them a tool that you've got in your back pocket.
