---
title: "Methods of Leadership"
channel: "Lens Academy"
url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NLuWmScjyeM"
---

This video is on different polarities that you can embody in leadership. This started with me thinking about facilitation and leadership and how people often define those differently. And then I realized there were a lot of different ways, kind of ends of a spectrum, that people exist on when we're talking about leadership. And we wanted to give some examples of those: what different kinds of leader can you be, and where you might want to find someone to even out a polarity that you have.

One type of polarity is a directive style versus a responsive one. The directive leader is really concerned about setting and holding whatever frame it is that we're operating in. And the responsive leader is really more concerned about how we move within it. I think this style is often called servant leadership. Directive will probably seem a bit more rigid. But for example, sometimes I have a team that's really new. They're early in their career and maybe they have the kinds of roles that really need a lot of guidance and instruction. For them, a directive style might work a whole lot better. Whereas particularly if you have a group who is more seasoned, who doesn't need a lot of guidance and direction, or who are the kind of people that micromanaging doesn't sit well with, responsive leadership is a whole lot more impactful for them.

Mhm. Another thing you can call this is yin and yang. And that doesn't have to be masculine and feminine, but it's like the classic symbol, one contains the other to some degree. And knowing when to embody each of them is really essential. If you have too much yang, it feels like a cage to resist, and too much yin, it's like a bed to fall asleep in. So for instance, a yang or directive leader sets time containers, might call people out on breaches of integrity, and a yin leader is more like following flow, changing time based on what's happening in a group, honoring when people show up whatever time it is because they're respecting themselves.

An example of this is when I was first learning circling, which was the original practice that I got trained in. I had a teacher who was very young and he was very good at it. Sometimes I think of yang as like striking a bullseye, and yin is like, I don't know, fuzzing out the bullseye or something, like holding the whole thing, and in the general area of probability we've struck something, and it's still effective. But yang can really hit something home and people feel it really deeply if you get that right. And it requires having, I think, sometimes a little bit of a shell. You have to be okay with getting things wrong, with people not liking you as much. Holding a strong container. And yin can be very loving.

And so this teacher was wonderful. He would just say things that he thought were true about people and be really accurate, and be very clear on the container and the integrity. And because he was my main teacher, I thought that that's what circling looked like. And I couldn't do it. I thought I just had to learn more. And I kept trying and trying and trying. I just have to be more clear with my assumptions. I just have to set a stronger container. And I would get so pent up and scared of saying anything wrong that I wouldn't speak and then the circle would fall apart. And this came to a head in the last circle that I led during my training, where I did this so badly that another leader in the circle had to pick it up and lead for me.

And I was devastated. I was like, I can't circle. I just need to never do this again. And I didn't, for about 6 months. And then over time I started asking myself, is there a different way to do this? And I started developing a little more of my own style. Maybe there's value to calling people out and holding them to integrity and showing them new things about themselves, but maybe there's also value to them just feeling loved, even if there are things that could be improved, and that's also important. And over time, I really developed my own style of how to do this. And I even started teaching circling. And then later on, Decker and I started leading together. And it turned out that our styles were really complementary. Very different, but really complementary when done together. But until I acknowledged that there was another side to that spectrum instead of a right and wrong, it was really hard for me to do the thing.

Yeah, that's like your superpower. I know it is now. Yeah. And I'm gradually getting better at the yang, but really slowly. I still work with other people when I need that. Yeah, hell yeah.

So another polarity might be one that looks like teaching versus eliciting or coaching. We often have people who, as a leader, are just more comfortable telling the group the things they need to hear. They like to give instruction. They like to make things really clear and easy to understand. And then for some groups that works really well. Then there are other leaders who work better if they're just asking lots of questions from the group all the time. And so in a way it's a style of leadership that's like curiously pulling out of the group whatever it is that they're trying to learn. And so in a sense you get each person in the group involved in their own learning rather than handing them all the answers.

Another one is the more cognitive or rational approach versus the emotive or intuitive approach. I find that some people really care about the data. They want to know the theory behind the thing. They want to know what studies are supporting this work that we're doing. And then there are others whose deepest power is in tuning into their intuitive sense of how the room is feeling, what people need, and they'll lead with that. I think sometimes this is called system one versus system two. Oh, different parts of the brain. Yep. So I loved what you said on this, that reliance on cognition often misses nuance. It's technically correct, but people can find it hard to engage with it. And then in the emotive, if there's too much emotion, people don't feel held in a strong container and the group can find it harder to come to consensus. Yep.

And there are lots of other polarities like this. So one thing I'll invite is: think about this. Whenever we teach leadership in person, one of the first things I ask is, what does a good leader do? Or what do you see in a good leader that makes you want to follow? And people will put all of these different words up on the board, like integrity, flow, time container, self-awareness, and then we'll look at them and I'll say, can you do all of these? And some people will say yes. And there's a way in which you can embody at least a little bit of all of them, but can you do all of them equally? Do you look at that board and think, okay, I do a little more of this one naturally, and this one I kind of want to learn but it's not my natural thing, and this one I don't want to learn at all, it's just not really important to me?

I've tried to do yang. I've tried to do the kind of incisive just noticing the thing in the person and I just don't love it. Whenever I use it, I actually lose touch with my intuition. It's like it cuts off something in me. So development in leadership is really about noticing what you need to develop to be a leader. I had a really hard time when I started with time containers. I would always show up late for things. And I found that it was actually really important to people that time containers be held with integrity. And so I had to figure out a way, either personally or systemically, to develop that. Sometimes I would try to be more kind of intense about showing up on time. Sometimes I'd have someone else start it if I was going to show up late. So you can also work within the system.

So three ways you can go at this. I kind of named these, but to name them again. Notice what you're naturally good at and can use as your superpower. Notice what you aren't great at but want to get better at, either because you think it's important for your values as a leader, or because you want to learn and think you can. And then notice what you're not good at and also don't want to learn. That's a place where you can start bringing in other leaders to work with you, to basically shore up your weak edges. I tend to try to work with leaders that are very different than me because they can show the group things that I can't.

Okay.
