---
title: "New Norms of Online Facilitation"
channel: "Lens Academy"
url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BwsjOF4UECY"
---

This video is on the new normal of online communication.

New situations require different norms and there are some things that differ in online versus offline that as facilitators we need to think about. What do we actually want to do about those instead of just pretending that our events can be the same and we're just going to transition them directly to online? How can we actually make online as rich or richer than what we can do in person?

So, a couple things that differ online. There's one conversation rather than several because only one person can speak at a time unless you put people in breakout groups, and this can lead to conversational overlaps and awkwardness. Also, people can't have side conversations, which is usually where a lot of information and connection is gained. So, one thing we need is a way of knowing who's to speak and when and moderating conversational flow and even creating these smaller group interactions intentionally.

Another thing, you can't interrupt people easily. If someone's not following the context I set or they're taking up all the air time by speaking a lot, it's necessary to actually break in and stop them or we can lose trust from other participants. But because, at least in American culture, interrupting is considered very rude, it actually requires changing social norms for that to be okay.

Another thing, totally private breakout rooms where facilitators can't see participants. We don't know if they're following rules. We don't know if they're having conflict with each other unless they use the raise hand function. We can't know. And on those lines, it's harder to get an energetic read. I don't know what's happened in breakout rooms when people come back. I really only can get text feedback by asking in chat or a couple voice shares. I can't see the person's whole body.

And I think we have to stop thinking in these terms of let's put live events online and start thinking about how do we actually create new norms and rules for new environments. The reason I know that this is possible: I created a platform called Connect, and now we've done online connection events every single day for the last five years, and we have actually created as much depth and as much community in many cases as we were able to do in person.

So I've cataloged some features that distinguish online environments from in-person ones, technological features if you will. These are mostly referring to Zoom. There are other major platforms like Google Meet, Hopin, Run the World, Sococo. These all have their ways of having people interact, but since most people use Zoom, that's mostly the one I'm going to talk about. And I'll say each feature and then I'll talk about some things that you can do to play with that to actually get deeper results.

So, first of all, only being able to have one speaker at a time when you're in the big group. So, something you can do, you can set a timer for each speaker and leave yourself unmuted so that they hear and stop talking when it goes off. So, that allows you to control the amount of time and also not always have to be the one to interrupt. You can use the chat channel as a second form of communication, a place to comment on the current speaker's shares. Now, one thing about the chat channel, some people find it very distracting to have messages popping up in that all the time. One thing they can do is keep the chat open and just have it on the side of the computer so they don't always see new messages, or tell people when you want them to check chat and when you don't want them to check chat.

Okay, so mute and unmute options, which is one thing you can't do in real life, offline life. You can mute or unmute other people or even kick them off the call if they're being disruptive. Something I really like doing as well is you can mute yourself and have people share secrets and confessions with each other and things that ordinarily they wouldn't say if it was vocal.

So then we have breakout rooms, which are honestly one of the things that I find best about online because even though there can be downsides to not seeing people, where else in person can you get that degree of privacy unless you're in a big building where you can put everybody in separate rooms? Often times people feel very safe when they know that no one else is listening in. And you can very quickly put people together into pairs or triads or quads or any number and you can anonymize them without having to do the whole counting off or organizing.

So some fun things you can do with this, you can manually sort who you want to be together with or without people knowing your reasoning. I find this really useful for instance when I'm facilitating with companies and I want to have managers and employees separate or have them intentionally together. You can also do this to find creative ways of having people connect. Example, create a party with subgroups of friends that you want to meet each other. Have them spend the first few minutes figuring out why you thought they would get along. Or put all the extroverts in one group and the introverts in another to balance speaking time. You can actually really make sure that different demographics get more chance to share than they otherwise would by being aware of who's in your group and how you want to break them up.

Next piece, multimedia, video, voice, chat, and screen share. And these are all separate functions that you can manipulate independently, unlike in person. Screen share things you can do: you can have interactive sites and slides. There's a lot of good learning sites that you can use. I've even just found a spinner online where I can change the different sections of it and people can go there and spin it. So find sites that reflect what you want to do, have PowerPoints, have things that people can edit, but also that you can show to help them follow along.

In larger groups, you can gather information quickly or give a lot of people a chance to share their experience, way more than you could offline, by inviting them all to post in chat. I really like doing something at the beginning like post in chat your name and where you're from and you have this interactive line of things going on while everyone's arriving. If you want to create a little more interaction between the chat and the video, you can have people read out each other's shares as a form of solidarity. So ask something like, "I'd love to hear how that last exercise was for you. If you see someone else's share that you agree with, you feel the same, I'll invite you to unmute and read it aloud." You have to demo that a couple times and be the first to go before people get comfortable, but I've had it be a really good form of deepening, especially after a meditation.

You can turn your video off or on. Especially in corporate groups, sometimes you want people to do things that they wouldn't normally be comfortable with. So I've heard some facilitators offer, "Everybody turn off your video. I'm going to put on a song and share my audio and we're just gonna have a five minute dance party. You don't have to have anybody watching, but you do have to dance."

Other things, you can pin people's videos. So, this is the next piece. I've had dance hosts online, request permission with this person first, but pin somebody's video and that person gets to present and dance for a while. Or you can pin somebody's video that's speaking, so all the attention goes to them. Or even eye gazing activities, pin a person up, everybody eye gazes with them through the screen. And actually it's kind of beautiful to only be able to look at one person in that case. You can direct people's attention in a different way online than you can in person if you're creative with it.

Another feature, you usually are only getting a chest-up view of people and more people dress informally, often at home. So, one game you can play is the guess my pants game, a perennial favorite. Also, people are oftentimes more relaxed if they have a choice in what clothes they wear, and most people aren't taking calls from home wearing a suit, at least in the calls I've seen. So, you can capitalize on that. You're in your home environment, you're wearing different clothes, what you invite people to wear, where they get to take the calls.

And that's another piece which is different locations. You can play show and tell games where people pick up things in their space and they talk about what this means to them. This is done by one of my favorite artists who's a friend of mine. Getting pictures from him has me feel really excited because I know him.

And the last piece on this is lack of touch and physicality, which honestly is a downside of online. It's just a thing. Something you can do with that, however, is people oftentimes, because they're not as interactive with others, they end up sitting still for long periods of time. So, make sure that you have transitions. Have people change locations, change how they're sitting, move around, have a break. It's something we have to build in because it's not happening as naturally. People are talking at a screen, they're not even moving their head in the same way. One other thing I really like doing with that is if you don't want to be on screens the whole time, but you have a day-long event for instance, ask people to get each other's numbers and call someone from the group and take a walk while you talk with them. Maybe even describe what's happening and what you see.

In general, often times just speaking to the fact that things are different is really helpful. Saying to the group, "I know we're not getting the same social cues we usually do from each other. I know we'd all probably love to be in a room together, but we're here now together. So, what can we make of it?"

And in groups, especially when you start, you can discuss the social contract. So, this is different. How do we want to structure it? How do we want to deal with speaking time, with breakouts and videos? Do we want to end five minutes early so everyone can have a break before their next meeting? You can use this kind of discussion to open up a lot of agency and possibility in a group. So, I want to encourage you to get creative and find your own ways of doing things online.
