---
title: "Following Aliveness"
channel: "Lens Academy"
url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AjYGfO5Ly0E"
---

This video is on following aliveness. Following aliveness is one of the best ways to keep a group engaged. It's a tool that many facilitators use intuitively but rarely actively. Aliveness is noticing and following where the energy is in a group. Who has the most important information, the most engaging share, where people's attention is going, what ideas do people react to the most. Comedians do this all the time. They follow the audience's reaction to know where to pause, what joke to tell next. I've done pair activities where I tell one member of the pair to interview the other and just ask questions about the words and phrases where they see the other person come most alive, lean forward, increase their volume, become more facially animated. Within 5 minutes, most of the room is either laughing or crying.

Aliveness is not just about the most animated person. Many facilitators end up engaging or preferring only a few people because they go after whoever is most excited, is most animated. Many teachers and bosses make this mistake too. Instead, you can think of aliveness as being about the delta, the change in individuals from their norm, how they were a minute ago. And it can also be about the person responding most to what's happening right now.

You also don't always need words to find the delta of aliveness. I heard a great story once from the teacher Kasha Urbaniak and she was talking about Hillary Clinton in the 2016 election. She was saying that one of the reasons Hillary Clinton may not have been as engaging is if you listen to one of her speeches and you put it on mute, there was very little animation. There was very little signaling going on on a non-verbal level. Her explanation for this is that women, especially in power, are taught to neither be too passionate or too reserved. And so, in trying to even that out, Hillary might have gone a pretty far way towards neutrality. And then that made aliveness difficult for people to engage with.

Following aliveness keeps a group inspired and animated. Here's how to follow aliveness in the group. One, you can give more time to an activity where people are really engaged. They're talking to each other. They're active in their movements. Two, you can ask for information. "Hey, I noticed a moment ago we seemed kind of sleepy and right now, after a break you all are animated, maybe more than I'd expect. Did something happen on the break?"

Maybe it's a group of managers and their inspiration about a project is really low because they hit a roadblock. You can fix it if you notice the delta of aliveness because then you can ask did something happen and they might say yeah, we hit an issue and you just wouldn't know it otherwise. If aliveness changed negatively, try giving the group a break. This often kind of evens out and wipes the slate clean so that people can re-engage.

To follow aliveness in individuals, first notice who lights up at something. Give them a project to follow it further. It's especially good to have a one-on-one conversation about this. The best managers track aliveness on their team and they find the right places for people based on it. In our own team at Authentic Revolution, I hire people for jobs and then sort their actual roles based on aliveness. For instance, we hired someone last year as an assistant and a marketer. But over time, we found out that he was more naturally energized by working directly with people. And now he's one of our best coaches.

How did we find that out? We gave him a bunch of different activities and then asked him which he was most alive at. And also noticed where his response time was faster than others. That's a natural sign of energy if someone's doing something quickly. It's sometimes hard for people to admit that they're not alive in places they feel they should be. And so sometimes you have to notice outside cues. If someone's aliveness decreases, they become more still or start getting slower to get work done, it's a good idea to check in on this. Either they'll re-engage or give you information on what they need instead.

So next time you talk with someone, try noticing the aliveness and following it. Pay attention to both words and expression and see what happens.
