---
title: "An AI... Utopia? (Nick Bostrom, Oxford)"
channel: "Skeptic"
url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zAV0Nj4PyZo"
---

All right, hi everybody! It's Michael Shermer. We're here in the offices of the Skeptic Society and Skeptic Magazine. I just want to ask you to give your support to us. We are a 501(c)(3) nonprofit science education organization. We promote science as opposed to junk science, voodoo science, pathological science, bad science, nonscience, and plain old nonsense. And unless you've been abducted by aliens or sent by Elon Musk to Mars for the last 30 years, you know there's a lot of nonsense out there. Some people call us debunkers, but you know what, there's a lot of bunk that needs debunking. That's part of our job, as well as explaining and understanding why people believe in bunk. And so if you want to support our efforts, go to skeptic.com/donate. Skeptic.com/donate. Your tax-deductible donation will support our work here at the Skeptic Society.

Nick, thanks for coming on. It's a great honor to speak to you. I don't think we've ever met in person, but I'm a long-time fan of your work, and you've really spurred an international conversation. Yeah, with the whole AI thing. Yeah.

Now it's been fascinating in the years since Superintelligence came out in 2014 just how much has changed. What used to be a very fringe topic - I mean, back then, at least in academia, the whole idea that AIs could potentially achieve general intelligence someday and maybe superintelligence, and that that could pose various kinds of risks - was dismissed as science fiction or futurism. And there were like in the world in total maybe like a handful of people scattered around the internet trying to work on the AI alignment problem. And now of course all the frontier AI labs have research groups working on this, and you have statements coming out of the White House and other places focusing on transformative AI. So yeah, it's been an interesting journey indeed.

Let me start off with a statement from your colleague Eliezer Yudkowsky. You'll be familiar with this. After ChatGPT came out, he published an op-ed in Time Magazine. This actually - oh my God, it's one year ago today he published this. That's amazing. "Many researchers steeped in these issues, including myself, expect that the most likely result of building a superhumanly smart AI under anything remotely like the current circumstances is that literally everyone on Earth will die. Not as in maybe possibly some remote chance, but as in this is the obvious thing that would happen."

What do you think about that extreme statement? Well, I mean, so there's a spectrum of people with different p(doom)s, as is known colloquially - the probability of doom from AI - where he's at one towards one end of that, like amongst perhaps the most pessimistic, or certainly amongst them, among a set of people who actually have some knowledge and have thought about this. And then others have lower probabilities. But I certainly think there is a real chance, a real existential risk that will be connected to this transition to the machine superintelligence era. And it's non-trivial, and we should work to reduce it by putting in the effort to develop scalable methods for AI control in whatever time we have available before this happens. And there is now more talent and resources going into that, so that's good news. But I still think we don't yet fully have that solved.

Your institute's the Future of Humanity - the other one, the Future of Life, issued that statement a year ago now calling for a pause on AI development. I noticed you didn't sign it. Why is that? Well, I'm not a big signer of things in general. I just - the whole, with isms and signing - it's just my personality. I feel there's also a little bit of a risk if you're a philosopher, if your kind of job is to try to be a little detached and to evaluate things and be open-minded. Like, once you start to get involved in a particular campaign, it's very hard to retain the ability to change your mind. It's not impossible, but it gets harder. And I feel philosophy is hard enough as it is without adding extra difficulties. I have no objection to other people. I think it's good - people should be involved in campaigns and working for things. It's just I always feel a little awkward. Also, usually any one given statement, there is always something that I slightly would have a different view or word it differently. And so yeah, it's more just my hangup rather than some kind of big statement I'm trying to make by not signing the statement. Right, the only statements I sign are that there should be no signed statements. We should let people just say whatever they want. Free speech. Yeah.

Okay, so just give us a little bit of background. You're so famous in this area. How did you get interested in AI? I mean, are you like a Star Trek fan, or you know, go back to your childhood or whatever, teen years, whatever triggered you to go down this pathway.

Yeah, you know, I'm actually not so much a science fiction type of reader. I mean, a lot of my friends and colleagues are. I just never really been much into that. No, I had a - when I grew up in Sweden, and this was before the internet, in a relatively small town, and I knew nobody when I grew up who was at all interested in literature or science or ideas or anything like that. So I was like bored out of my mind in school. And I associated sort of learning with school, so I didn't - and then I sort of went to the local library. I think I was 15, randomly one afternoon, and started pulling out one book and another. And I realized that there was actually a big world of ideas very different from the stuff that was covered in school, that was super fascinating. And then I pivoted and became kind of fanatical, engaged in this project of self-education, because I felt I had been missing out. Like, I've wasted 15 years of my life and I wanted to make up. And then I started to study. I studied physics and AI and neuroscience. And I painted and wrote poetry and philosophy of course, and just everything I could sort of lay my hands on.

And for as almost as long as I remember, it always seemed to me that there's a bunch of things we can do to change the world that consist basically of moving things around in the external world. But what would be more likely to cause a profound change would be if one changed the thing that does the changing. And so all of the technologies and ideas that we have ultimately come through sort of the birth canal of the human brain. So anything - if you could sort of upgrade the human brain or change our mood or cognitive capacities - that would be potentially transformative. And in parallel with that, if you could develop new brains through artificial intelligence research, that also could be world-changing. So I had this vague sense from early on, and then I kind of - yeah, it got more specific as I went along.

Neural networks, intriguingly, actually from the very beginning seemed to me to have legs in the sense of being on the right path. And I remember I think I was like 17 and I had gotten this, on interlibrary loan from the local library, this volume on Parallel Distributed Processing, which was like one of the first - by Rumelhart - and like this classic now, but where they tried to deconstruct biological neural circuits in mathematical terms. And I was super fascinated about that. And so yeah, and then I studied computational neuroscience later on in London. And now this whole deep learning revolution seems to validate the sense that these kind of massively distributed pattern-recognizing learning algorithms is the way to go.

Yeah, yeah. You know, somebody like me who doesn't work in this area, you know, there's so many great smart experts on all sides of this. You know, you have Elon Musk and Stephen Hawking and Bill Gates concerned about AI existential risk. And then you have other people like Kevin Kelly or Steven Pinker going, "No, no, no, this is not going to happen. We can do this incrementally." And so, I always think of you as sort of in the middle maybe. You know, your Superintelligence book introduced the idea of the paperclip maximizer and the alignment problem. But I didn't feel you went to the extreme position of existential risk. But maybe give us a little bit of where you are now, since that was 2014, right, Superintelligence. Where you stand on the threats of this based on that alignment problem.

Yeah, I think it is going to be a very powerful thing if we do create machine superintelligence. It's not just Internet 3.0 or mobile internet or like one of these "always some new cool thing," right? But I think this is qualitatively different in that it will be the last invention we ever need to make, if we do it, because then it would do the further inventing and presumably at digital speed. And so I think it will be transformative, with enormous upside, but also potentially big downside if we fail to align it to human values.

And there is now a lot of resources where people are trying to explain how creating very powerful optimization systems, unless you're able to sort of point them very precisely, could result in disasters in various different ways. So if we are lucky, we will solve that problem by the time somebody figures out how to solve the problem of making AI sufficiently smart. And as I said earlier, there are a lot of people working on that now, including a lot of the smartest people I know are kind of going into this now - AI alignment. And more resources are being spent by frontier labs as well.

In terms of devoting - I wonder, one of the solutions would just be government regulation, like of any technology. So here's my example. I have a Tesla. So I'm here in Santa Barbara, I want to go to LAX, take my flight. I push the little button, I go "navigate LAX." Now it knows to avoid the heavily trafficked LA freeway, so it takes me down side roads and so on. The moment it takes me up on a sidewalk to mow down a bunch of pedestrians in order to avoid some traffic, you know, how long would it be before the Department of Transportation and safety board, you know, swoop down on Elon's company to prevent that from ever happening again? You know, like a New York minute. Maybe that's one solution.

Well, I mean, if it happens in small pieces and gradually like that, we might have the ability to observe things going wrong and then take corrective measures. And that's how we deal with most new technologies and the problems they cause. Like, we invent cars, we find that they sometimes crash, so we invent seat belts and traffic lights, etc. I think there is a small subset of things that could go wrong that are in a different category. I call them existential risks. And these are where there is a risk to the very survival of Earth-originating intelligent life. These are risks, in other words, that would sort of put a permanent end to the human story, where we don't get a second try. And so these are harder to deal with because we got to get them right on the first try.

I think AI is one potential source of existential risk, and there might be a few other areas. Like, synthetic biology might be another area where we could get unlucky and discover that there is some relatively easy way to do something tremendously destructive. And so yeah, if one looks at AI in particular as a source of existential risk, there are a few different ways in which it could do that.

One thing to recognize is that once you have something that is even just human-level, but even more so when you have superhuman levels of intelligence, is that it would be able to anticipate our responses to it. So if it wanted to mow a lot of people down, if you were like some sort of rogue self-driving car AI, right, it wouldn't just run over a few and then be surprised that the Department of Transportation shut it down. That would be an obvious thing that we can even realize, right? And so it would make some smarter plan to achieve its goal of mowing people down that might include things like deceiving us about its capabilities, deceiving us about its goals and intentions. It would have convergent instrumental reasons perhaps to seek more resources and intelligence while also convincing us that it is safe. And so this can make such systems harder to test, because they might behave very differently in the deployment phase than in the testing phase.

And so yeah, if we think like, you know, you could make analogies to when Homo sapiens arose on this planet and what happened to our Neanderthal brethren at that point. Or when a, indeed at a slightly lower level of intensity, but when a technologically more advanced civilization has encountered a less technologically advanced civilization, which has happened - and often it doesn't end up very well for the less advanced civilization. So if you imagine that delta between sort of human cognitive and technological capacity and what the AI could do being very large, then we might have a kind of much bigger encounter, but where we now, like with our fancy Western advanced technology, would be like the underdog. And this would be basically like an alien civilization coming from the future, but in the shape of a superintelligent AI that has kind of run ahead. So that's one type of scenario.

There are other scenarios in which it might unfold more gradually, and there might be many of these AIs and they are competitive. And there are dynamics in the economic competition between these different AI systems that might be hard to control. And if you insist on having too much human oversight and human in the loop, it might slow down your AI system. And somebody else who, you know, has fewer scruples - their AI system will out-trade you on the stock market, or out-invent you in technology space, and outmaneuver you in military space. Like, their drones just are autonomous and operate faster, and you have some guy who has to sit to press a button every time before it fires. Like, if we're unlucky, the dynamic there could just be such that the winning strategy is just to basically allow the AIs to run at full speed and do whatever they want. And it's not clear what would happen to the human species in the long term in that kind of scenario. So there are various different ways in which things could conceivably go off the rails.

Yeah, maybe I was thinking about Yudkowsky's statement - all life on Earth - how would that happen? Well, the only thing I could think of was, because he didn't give any examples, but you know, like maybe AI creates a video, a deepfake video, that's so convincing showing Biden launching the nukes against Russia, or vice versa, and then that initiates a large-scale nuclear exchange. And that could end all life. That's the only thing I can think of that could end all life on Earth. Even there, probably not. A nuclear exchange wouldn't end all life. It probably wouldn't even end all human life on the southern hemisphere.

I mean, it would - like, I recommend against running that experiment. And we certainly know that it would be like the biggest horror ever. But there is still a distinction to be drawn, even if it's like academic, between a global catastrophic risk, that could be very bad, and an existential risk, which would literally be the end of the human experiment. Because there have been big setbacks. There have been Dark Ages and plagues and all kinds of stuff. At one point in our prehistory, it looks like there was a population bottleneck and we might have been down to a few thousand individuals. But eventually we came back from that. And similarly, if there is a nuclear war, but you know, a bunch of coastal areas in the southern hemisphere, they can do fishing or whatever, they survive, and then you know, after a few hundred years, we might be back to where we started.

But there are other ways available to a superintelligence. Like, it could invent new biological constructions that would wipe us out, maybe. Or nanotechnology. Or maybe it just doesn't even bother very much with us but just sort of starts to transform Earth into one giant data center or some sort of launch facility for launching space probes to kind of spread throughout, and we sort of perish as a side effect of the waste heat or something like that.

Yeah, I think it would be wrong to anchor too much on any particular concrete scenario of the precise mechanism whereby human life or human values would be trampled over. And more think more abstractly that if you have this very, very powerful strategizing force in the world that is antagonistic, chances are this much smarter, more strategic thing would eventually prevail and be able to do whatever it tried to do. So that's kind of a class of ways in which things could go wrong.

Now hopefully we will learn how not to do that. And as I said, then we might end up in this condition of a solved world that I discuss in the book.

Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, I want to get to Deep Utopia in a minute. But I just want to give you a chance to respond to a couple of your critics. Steven Pinker writes of these purported existential threats: "They depend on the premises that (1) humans are so gifted that they can design an omniscient and omnipotent AI, yet so moronic that they would give it control of the universe without testing how it works, and (2) the AI would be so brilliant that it could figure out how to transmute elements, rewire brains, yet so imbecilic that it would wreak havoc based on elementary blunders of misunderstanding."

Yeah, well, first of all, some elements there are just added for no reason, I guess. Transmute elements - I don't particularly know why that would be a necessary component of the view that AI could pose risks. But I think the basic idea that we could be smart enough to create this thing without being smart enough to realize that we also need to solve the control problem - unfortunately, that seems like a realistic possibility. We seem smart enough to create it - I mean, you can judge for yourself, but year by year we've seen AI capabilities galloping ahead. And I mean, it's an open question whether this current paradigm will take us there, but certainly it doesn't seem a ridiculous view to think that it might.

And then, that we might fail to realize that there could be a difficult control problem, or that we could mistakenly convince ourselves that we've solved it even though our solution is flawed - I think it's also pretty plausible. And more plausible because there would be strong incentives for people to do precisely that. If you have multiple labs or multiple countries all competing to develop this potentially hugely lucrative technology, right? And also strategically relevant for national security, etc. There's this racing dynamic where multiple groups race to get there first. And whoever slows down or spends more of their efforts on safety and precautions and testing, they just fall behind. You could see that even in a good scenario, where people realize that ideally we should do this carefully, that there would still be just overwhelming competitive pressures to make it happen as quickly as possible, even with fewer safeguards.

And I'm sure that as we move closer to this, the kind of polarized debates that we're already beginning to see will be amplified. And who knows how that shakes out. People have a tendency to run in herds. And this holds on both sides of this AI debate. I mean, in fact, I have started to worry slightly about the possibility of overshooting the target in terms of AI alarm.

Back in 2014 when the book came out - and I worked on it for six years before that - the whole possibility of risks from transformative AI was completely neglected. So I thought clearly there needed to be more attention to that than was given to it at the time, because at the time it was basically zero. So it's like - now, on the other hand, there is a lot more. And we are beginning to hear even top-level policymakers start to say negative things about - like, I think it's unlikely, but less unlikely than two years ago, that we could end up in a trajectory where AI is never developed. Because we either end up with some sort of permanent ban, or some agreement to slow down so much that before we actually get around to doing it, we destroy ourselves in some other way, like through some other technology or something.

And this still seems unlikely, but the pendulum is swinging, and I don't know - we don't have a very fine-grained ability to sort of choose where it'll stop. Like, it's like an avalanche - you can maybe trigger it, but once it's going, you can't call it back. Yeah, and so people - you know, I don't think we're there yet. But you could imagine the stampede of consensus forming that AI is a bad thing, and then it becomes taboo to say positive things about AI, and then policymakers competing with one another to be tough on AI, just as it happens in foreign policy contexts sometimes. And you know, you could imagine various scenarios in which we kind of go too far in the other direction.

Well, here maybe an analogy with the development of nuclear weapons, where you get an arms race where maybe you don't want to develop it in this direction, but the other guy may do it, so you have to do it because the other guy is going to do it. And then and so on and so forth, and you end up where we are now. Something like that, maybe.

Yeah, that certainly is a class of concern. And it feeds into this current debate about open-sourcing AI models, which has the obvious thing going for it that it's nice - more people get access, democratizes AI, more eyes can detect more problems, etc. So that's true for other open-source things as well. Like, it's generally a nice thing, kind of culturally, to open source. But with the frontier models, there is a question of whether that is ultimately the right approach. Because it does also mean relinquishing any ability to influence how the AI is used. So if you are an AI lab that trains your AI to refuse requests to give advice on how to construct biological weapons or commit cybercrime or whatever else it might be, then if you open-source the model, it's usually quite easy to remove the safeguards. You do some more fine-tuning, training, and you can kind of train the model to actually be of assistance in these ways. And as we move closer to truly transformative AI, of course, if the model is open-sourced, anybody with a sufficiently large computer cluster could run it. And you can't sort of call it back if it turns out that there is some additional invention that could make its capabilities go above a critical threshold.

Yeah, these large language models - ChatGPT and so forth, or worse, the Gemini, embarrassingly bad programs - are these down the wrong path to either dystopia or utopia? Do you think there's something else that'll develop, and this is the wrong direction - that this is not going to lead to either dystopia or utopia?

I mean, I think it's on the sort of shortest path towards more capable AI. I think the current models we have are basically the first models that we figured out how to develop that are still very capable. I think the technological trajectory has not been shaped very much by some vision about what type of system ultimately we need that would be the safest. It's just like it's hard to get AI to work at all, and we try everything, and some things work. And the thing that works best currently are these large language models. Or, I mean, they are increasingly becoming multimodal models.

And it will be interesting to see whether that is all we need. There is a school of thought - this scaling hypothesis - that basically what we need to do is simply to scale these systems up even more. And just as we saw almost qualitatively new capabilities as you went from GPT-1 to GPT-2 and then GPT-3, new qualitative - well, it is GPT-4, you start to see some actual reasoning and understanding there. You know, if we go to GPT-5 or GPT-6, just make them bigger with more data, more training, more parameters - it's possible that things will just fall into place without much further effort.

It's also possible that these will kind of be the engine blocks and you need a little loop, some additional little thing on top of this - some external memory system that it can read and write from, some agentic loop that makes it possible to do more reasoning and planning than is visible in just one forward pass through a big transformer model. But there are a bunch of such ideas already in existence, and it might be by sort of combining these in the right way and scaling it up, you would maybe get all the way. Of course, we don't know until it happens.

What about these examples we saw of just embarrassingly bad searches, where ChatGPT is just making up fake law papers and medical findings that didn't even exist? Or worse, the Gemini imposing DEI ideology onto just basic factual searches, like "show me pictures of the popes" and they show pictures of women popes. I mean, it was just horrible, embarrassingly bad.

Well, so these are two different classes of problems. So the latter one, I think, was on purpose. Like, it was designed - I mean, obviously not designed specifically that these historical characters should be rendered the way they were - but that it was the result of a specific attempt to make the outputs of these models feature a more diversity of different human types, to sort of combat whatever stereotypes would result by default if you just trained it on internet data, which comes predominantly from certain demographics who just have spent more time writing and posting on the internet and stuff. So I think there the solution is more to sort of change the precise way that it's fine-tuned.

As for the former problem, the problem of hallucination, that's more like a technical problem, like a real open research challenge. Because they don't want them to hallucinate. The people building these - Google doesn't want their AI to do this, but they haven't yet figured out how to completely remove that. I think as the AI systems become smarter, I think we will see less of that, just as a side effect of the general increase in capabilities. And already, I think there is a bit less of that now than there was like a couple of years ago. But yeah, I mean, certainly right now it makes sense to - I mean, you should always, I think this makes sense when you're getting advice from some human expert or from some human source as well - you need to apply your own critical scrutiny to try to evaluate whether it makes sense or not. And like doubly true if you're getting it from this generative AI.

Deep Utopia. Okay, the search for utopia has always historically been a bad idea. This is not a good goal to have because it always ends in disaster, because somebody is going to block us from reaching utopia and we have to eliminate them. You know what I'm talking about here, historically. Why are you using the word utopia? What do you mean by that? What are you after here for the long-term future?

Well, I mean, the word - so it's not a book about how to rearrange the political order or culture or society to achieve some great outcome, which is what most utopias are like. There are basically some - usually there are like a political program in disguise, or a critique of some tendency in contemporary society. Like, if they're dystopias, then - which is like the other side, you might say - like 1984 or Brave New World, kind of picking up on some problem in contemporary society and then saying, "Well, if you continue down this path, then we get to this thing everybody can see is bad, so let's reflect on what we're doing now and maybe course correct."

But Deep Utopia is rather something like a philosophical investigation into questions about human value. If you imagine the whole AI transition going well - so let's take as an assumption we develop this and we don't have any of these existential risks, and we end up with this future condition where the whole economy can be automated. And not only that, but this AI then develops all kinds of other super-advanced technologies, because amongst the jobs that could be automated if you had truly general AIs, of course, are also the jobs of scientists and researchers and inventors, etc.

So we then get to, I think, ultimately, if we think through where this eventually leads, a condition of technological maturity - a condition where we've developed most of those general technologies that are physically possible and for which there is some conceivable pathway from where we are now. And moreover, in this solved world, we will get not only technological maturity, but let's also imagine we solve our coordination problems - politics, no wars, the society is fair. All of those are of course extremely important practical problems that we need to fix. But I wanted to get actually to the point where you could ask the question and think about what happens then - assuming everything goes as well as possible, where do we end up and what role is there for humans in this world?

Because not only do we not need to work anymore to make a living - because the robots and AI could produce everything and drive the cars and run the factories and write the Word documents and whatever - but a whole bunch of other activities as well that currently occupy our days would become unnecessary in this condition of technological maturity. So right now, even if you didn't have to work, suppose you're independently wealthy, there's still a whole bunch of things you need to do. You need - I mean, you need to brush your teeth. Like, Bill Gates has to brush his teeth, otherwise he will have tooth decay. And there's no way around it, right? Similarly, if you want to be fit, you have to actually put in some effort on the treadmill or with the weights, and there is no shortcut. But at technological maturity, you could pop a pill that would give you the same physiological effects as spending a lot of time working out.

And so you can then go through activities one by one and think, "Do these still make sense in this condition of a solved world?" And for a lot of activities, the answer is seemingly no. They lose their point insofar as we do them for an instrumental reason. That is, we spend time and effort to do X in order to achieve some other thing Y. In most cases - in fact, almost all of them - at technological maturity, there would be shortcuts to Y that would seem to make the whole activity of doing X pointless.

Yeah. Okay, let me ask you a question. ChatGPT probably can't quite write a book as well as you do, but maybe the next version does. "Please write Nick's next book." Would you do that, or do you actually enjoy writing? I felt a sense of urgency to - I wanted to get it out before the singularity, before it writes it for you. But don't you enjoy this? This is my point. Don't you enjoy writing books? I don't want an AI to write my next book. I like writing my books.

But so now it feels like a very meaningful thing to do, right? Yeah, you think, you work, you rework it, and then you hope that in the end it will bring joy to somebody or they will learn something. But if it had been possible, like, instead of struggling with each paragraph and figuring out what you want to say - if I could just have pressed a key on my laptop that would have produced the same paragraph or a better paragraph - then it's not so clear. Would it still feel worthwhile to sit and struggle and sweat, if it was just a way of producing worse text that could have been done by just pressing the key that would activate GPT-8 or whatever to do it? I could still do it, but I think, at least prima facie, at first sight, it seems like it would put a big question mark over that activity. Like, does it really seem valuable to do, even if it were obviously materially pointless, and there was a much more sensible, easier way to achieve this?

I'm trying to find something that has a different value, that is, it's valuable in and of itself. Now, there's a lot of projects around my house - I just hire people to do it because I don't like doing it and I don't know what I'm doing. Or I'll just go to a Home Depot and buy the kit and just put it together rather than buying the raw supplies and sawing the wood and whatever. But I like writing my books, or I like riding my bike, or playing tennis, or whatever. I like working out. I don't want to take a pill to do that. I don't want to pay somebody to ride my bike or hire a ChatGPT to write my next book because I actually enjoy it. That's a different value. Good.

Yeah, no, I mean, certainly there would be nothing preventing you from still doing those things and many other things if you value the activity itself. And if you truly value the activity for itself, rather than - and in a way that might not be visible to us, actually, as a means to an end. For example, suppose you spend a lot of time writing because it actually made you happy, like it made you subjectively feel good. Well, there, that would be a shortcut. Right? Like, you could take a pill that would give you the same subjective happiness and good feelings. And moreover, without side effects or addiction potential, etc., at technological maturity.

No, Nick, no. It's the challenge that makes it valuable, not just some glow feeling. That's not what I'm - that's right. So there is a whole possible big set of possible reasons for working hard on the book, and some of those reasons would be removed in this hypothetical context. And it's like layers of onion you can peel away. And the question that the book is kind of exploring is: what remains after you really remove all the instrumental stuff? And I think there does remain something, but it's quite subtle. But I think ultimately there is a whole set of values that are currently a little bit often invisible to us that would come into view, and that it would make sense to focus more on, if the screaming moral imperatives of everything you have to do - like, you have to go to work otherwise you don't get the paycheck and how are you going to afford your rent; you have to help drive your kid to school because otherwise what's going to happen - there's so much stuff that we have to do. And if you look around the world, obviously there are huge needs everywhere that we should try to help fix.

If you imagine all of that going away, then I think there are many more subtle, quieter, almost aesthetic values that it would be appropriate to allow to have a bigger influence on what we do. Just as, you know, you walk out at night and you see this big canopy of stars and constellations. Now, they are always there, right? They are there during the day as well. It's just the blazing sun kind of makes them invisible. But if you imagine removing the sun, suddenly all of this rich, iridescent sky of more subtle values would come into view. And I think our sort of evaluative pupils should dilate in this condition of technological maturity to place more weight on those values. And there is a whole range of them. And I think it is from these constellations of fainter values that utopia would be constructed. Or at least, if you imagine a utopia that has rich structure, as opposed to a sort of simple hedonic utopia where we become kind of pleasure blobs through super drugs or direct neural stimulation. But if you imagine a more richly textured and structured utopia, I think the structure would come from a range of these canopy values that would come into view.

Yeah. I had Andrew Yang on the podcast a couple years ago. He was the presidential candidate pushing the UBI, Universal Basic Income. At the time, he was concerned about AI taking over taxi drivers, truck drivers, and so on. It was going to be hundreds of thousands of people put out of work. Now, that hasn't happened yet, but it could. But this is like saying, "Well, what are we?" A century ago, "What are we going to do with those elevator operators?" The little guy in there pushing the buttons for you. Well, there aren't any of those anymore. They went and found something else to do.

Now, can we say that most jobs are kind of crappy and no one really wants to do them? They do them because they have to make a living. So in a post-scarcity, Trekonomics kind of model, nobody has to do the work anymore. They can just write poetry or do art or write books, or I don't know what. Maybe they'll find other meaningful things to do. And that is - well, infinite. There's no upper ceiling on finding meaningful things to do.

Yeah, well, I mean, the question is whether they are meaningful. There's a lot of things you could do, and you could also not do them. But would that be meaningful? So right now, if, for example, you work hard and it allows you to support your family and take good care of - that gives meaning to your efforts. The boring office work maybe not so meaningful in itself, but if it achieves this outcome of making your home a good environment for your spouse and for your children - that gives meaning. Or if you work hard for a charity and it helps save the life of some disadvantaged group - you have achieved something and done some good in your world. Or you're a scientist and you work hard and you invent something new, either theoretically interesting or practically useful - you have achieved something.

So those kinds of meaning might be in short supply in this solved world, in that whatever the scientist could do would be much better done by AI scientists. And you wouldn't need to be a breadwinner because the bread would already be won through the economic abundance, etc. There would be no starving children in utopia, so no need.

Well, yeah, let's look at the economics of it. Okay, I can see the argument for "let's raise the lower bar as high as we can so no one is suffering." Everybody has three square meals a day, roof over their head, education, healthcare, and so forth. What's the upper ceiling? It seems like, you know - here I was thinking of David Deutsch's book, The Beginning of Infinity. There's an infinite amount of knowledge we can find, problems to solve. Why would that end?

Well, there are two questions there. One is whether it would end, but let's - and we can return to that. But there is a second kind of almost preceding question, which is: even if there is more to discover, whether we would be efficient at discovering it. So I'm suggesting even if there's important scientific research to be done at technological maturity, it would be much more efficiently done by machine intelligences. And so we wouldn't really - it would just be a waste of resources for a human to exert calories to try to think about these things. AI would do it much better, much quicker, and cheaper. So even if there was more, I think we wouldn't be useful for discovering it.

It's also possible, although this is an independent idea, that although there's always more to discover, the most important things might at some point already be discovered. And then it's kind of more and more trivial details that remain to be added to the scientific inventory of knowledge. Which I think is also likely, actually.

But what if you're that guy in 1896 that said, "You know, we've pretty much got physics all figured out here" - just before Einstein? Yeah, he was just a bit early, I see. He was just a tad early. Okay, yeah. Or two or whatever. But I mean, we've only been around - I mean, how long has science been going? A few hundred years or something, right? It's trivial in the big scheme of things. Yeah, and we don't even have superintelligent AIs to actually really get cranking on making intellectual progress. We're trying to do it with our meat brains. And so a few hundred years with meat brains - like, of course there's still more to learn.

So maybe an example of what you're talking about would be: how do we solve the problem of schizophrenia? And we don't really know yet, and we haven't made much progress, but maybe AI could test a thousand different chemical compound combinations to see what works, and it could do it in a couple of days rather than a couple of decades that humans would take to do it. And that would be a solved problem. But why would there be at some point no - well, okay, so you're saying there's a finite number of problems to be solved for human flourishing.

Machine - yeah, well, so at some point I think you have basically found the optimal ways of technologically achieving the types of outcomes that normally need to be achieved. You've invented the optimal solar panel. You've invented the optimal space-colonizing rocket. You have invented the best way of transmitting electricity from one point to another. So there might be like a trillion types of tasks at that level of description, and for each one of them you have worked out at the molecular level what the most efficient mechanism is to do it. Or maybe not the most efficient - maybe there are tiny improvements. You could improve it by one-tenth of one percentage point by researching it for another thousand years. And the AIs would be working to make these small optimizations. But it wouldn't be like discovering relativity theory or evolution theory or something like that - a simple insight that has a big earthquake of ramifications for the way we perceive ourselves in the world.

Yeah. All right, I'm going to read from your book here, the lines from Harry Lime in The Third Man: "You know what the fellow said: in Italy, for 30 years under the Borgias, they had warfare, terror, murder, and bloodshed, but they produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, and the Renaissance. In Switzerland, they had brotherly love, they had 500 years of democracy and peace, and what did that produce? The cuckoo clock."

So how do you address that point, that humans need challenge? Again, let's distinguish between happiness and meaningfulness - purposefulness. It's those challenges that give us meaning and purpose. That's the goal, not happiness.

Yeah, well, it's hard to tell. Certainly, if it were happiness in the subjective sense of positive affect, it would make the problem very easy. Because trivially, in utopia, at technological maturity, you could tune your hedonic well-being up or down very easily through neuro-technology or drugs and stuff. So if that's what we wanted, then we'll be home and dry. Problem solved. We'll definitely be able to do a lot of that in utopia.

If we want challenge, well, certainly we could create artificial challenges. Games - very elaborate games with all kinds of - you could have AIs inventing new games for us. So if artificial challenges are enough to realize that value that you pointed to, then also we're home and dry. That would also be very easy to do.

If we want genuinely meaningful challenges, then there is more of a challenge in seeing how that would be possible in Deep Utopia. Because prima facie, at least at first sight, it seems like our own efforts for most purposes are unnecessary. And then we could still do the thing, but it may not obviously be meaningful to do the thing, if there is nothing worthwhile achieved by doing it.

But I do think there are at least ways of rescuing part of what we want, if we want meaningful challenge even in utopia. And that might be, first of all, tasks that need to be performed by humans. So, for example, to take a very simple example: consumers that have a preference not just for a certain type of object, but also a preference regarding that object should have been manufactured, and in particular they want it to have been manufactured by hand, or by a human. Then that would be demand for human labor to produce. We see that today. So the consumers might pay more for a trinket that's made by some favorite group or indigenous tribe rather than in a sweatshop in Malaysia, even if the trinket is the same or equivalent. The fact that the causal process that brought it about was different might result in a difference in price.

Similarly, we might prefer to watch human athletes compete, even if the robots could run faster or box harder or whatever. That might just be a brute fact. And so you can then see - we might want a human priest administering the wedding, rather than a robot, even if the robot could say the same words, etc. So you could look through, and there might be many more of these that we can't afford currently. So nobody has even bothered inventing these services, but where humans have a sort of brute preference for it to be done by human effort.

And I think in addition to that, there might be more subtle ways in which there would be instrumental uses for human effort. If, for example, we have values - say you have a value that values the honoring of a certain tradition. Now, many traditions, in order to be continued, would need the active efforts of human beings to do whatever the things that are traditionally done - to have the ceremonies and to focus our attention on certain things. And even if we could create robots that went around and performed the same songs and dances and stuff, it wouldn't count as continuing that tradition. So if we value that, it might call upon us to make an effort. And that might be one of these subtle values. Or maybe right now the tradition is like, "Well, there are starving kids out there, we should focus on helping those." But once all the kids are fed and all the diseases are cured, then these slightly less urgent values might then deserve a lot of attention.

And aesthetic values - there might be things we have reason to do because it would just be beautiful if somebody did it. And social cultural entanglements - the way that different people have preferences about each other and what they do and how that - I think that might also produce some opportunities for natural purpose in utopia. You can also have artificial purpose where you just set yourself an arbitrary challenge and then have your brain motivated or changed so that you're super motivated to achieve it. That would be easy. But there might also be some of these more natural purposes.

Well, there is this DIY, you know, do-it-yourself movement, where people seem to like just doing it by hand. They just want to get their tools out and get up in the garage and start making stuff. I don't personally like this because I'm not very good at that, but it's a huge movement. So, I mean, you could hire somebody, or there's a machine that could make the little shed better than you can make it by hand, but people seem to like to do that. Why not have both? The AI does the stuff we don't like to do, and then I'm just going to do the stuff I do like to do.

Yeah, no, that seems good. Now, there is an additional challenge here, which is: lifespans could become very long, right? If we fix the things that cause disease and death and cellular decay, etc. So if you're going to live for maybe millions or billions of years, potentially - okay.

Nick, just get me to a hundred without Alzheimer's. All right, well, that's a good start. But you know, when you're 100 in perfect health - yeah, go for 200. Maybe you think, "Well, do I really want to check out now, or maybe do another year?" Let's push it a little bit further down. And at least it would be nice for you to have the option. Because like, I mean, probably when we were a kid, being 50 or 60 or whatever seemed ridiculous, might as well be dead. But now, of course, when you're there, you see that, well, there's a lot more that could be done and experienced.

And there are simple pleasures as well. There are things you might only want to do once or twice in life, but then you've done them. But there are other things - like a nice cup of tea or a coffee, it's kind of about as good on the ten-thousandth time you do it as on the first or second. You don't really - it's renewable, as it were. Like a renewable source of enjoyment.

But it does mean also one should maybe think, if the question is "What's the best possible future life that you could have if you remove all practical constraints and technological constraints?" - you really should think maybe in terms of a trajectory, not just a state that you would reach and then have sort of reached the peak. But more like, what's a developmental trajectory that you'd get the most out of? Each level of development - maybe eventually you've understood most things that can be understood by the human brain. Maybe at that point you would want to upgrade it a little bit, grow some more neurons or whatever, so you could explore the next level. But what's the right pace of that? Do you want to just rush to the end and become a planetary-sized superintelligence immediately? Or would you want to take the scenic route and then maybe spend a few hundred years first being a biological human and doing whatever can be done as a human, and then slowly increment?

So these are some of the questions that come up, and so many more. There's a lot of things to think about. Hopefully we will actually secure the future enough that - well, yeah, again, incrementally, I like Kevin Kelly's approach. Protopia, not utopia or dystopia. Just one small - make life a tiny bit better tomorrow than it is today. Don't aim for utopia just as a goal. Just make life a little bit better. Don't worry about 500 years from now. Just tomorrow.

I think that allows one to avoid a bunch of mischief that is performed in the name of grand visions. But I do think also sometimes it's useful to lift your gaze up and look at the horizon, or reflect on where you're going. There's the next step and the next step, but ultimately - so we have our human civilization, all this effort bent on science and technology and economic growth and everything, but very little effort spent on thinking: what, where do we end up if this continues? Sure.

But let's talk about creativity for a moment. Your book, I really enjoyed because it's completely different than most nonfiction science books that I read. You know, you have this kind of dialogue, this conversation, you're in a classroom, you're lecturing, you have handouts, students are asking questions. That was pretty creative and new. If you had asked ChatGPT to write your next book, I don't think it would have come up with that. You see where I'm going with this.

What about music? What's the origin of rock and roll? Well, folk music and jazz. All right, so in a century from now, what will be the next big musical trend? I don't know. I don't think it's possible to know. And I don't see how an AI would anticipate the next creative movement, not just in the arts and poetry or whatever, but in anything. You know, there's only so many combinations. I guess maybe it could grind through all the possible combinations for music that's going to be enjoyed by people. That seems to me, though, next to impossible to program.

Yeah, it might not be able to predict it. There's a lot of things that you couldn't predict even with - if you're a superintelligence. Like, even just the weather a year into the future, whether on a particular minute it will be raining - that's chaotic systems, right? And with something like creativity over the timescale of a century, the actual answer to that question will depend on what a lot of smart people are doing in the course of that century, maybe other AIs even smarter than the one that you think would be making the prediction. And it itself will interact with this.

But even if it's not predictable what creative results will precisely be attained centuries hence, it might still be possible that the actual creative work is more efficiently done by AIs. As this century unfolds, they might just be making the best paintings and writing the most beautiful poetry and creating the most compelling movies, etc. It's certainly not the case right now. I mean, current large language models have a sort of - cliche is maybe too strong a word, but there is a sort of middlebrow quality to their output. It's good but it's not great. It's kind of the typical thing that some person would say in a situation. They can produce more of that.

But great stuff comes from not just following along with the patterns that are already out there, but sort of looking at reality afresh with new eyes, whether the reality is inside yourself or outside of yourself, and really letting it speak to you. And then you sort of speak the words that come from your perception of this piece of reality that you're focusing on. And so it's like a different source of information.

But I have no doubt that AI will become increasingly creative. It's not a binary thing. I think we already see little glimpses of lower-level creativity, and I think the next generation will have more, and then more and more beyond that. For example, a few years ago, DeepMind's system AlphaGo had this move - what was it, 32 or something? Move 37, I forget - but it was in the match that AlphaGo was playing against Lee Sedol, the human Go champion. And there was a particular move that experts in Go thought was immensely original and creative. It was something no human would ever have played, that all the masters would advise students was an error. But then it still turns out, if you think a little bit more, you just realize how right it was, and it set everything up to win the game later. So that's within a somewhat circumscribed domain, but certainly creative within that domain. And I think the domains in which we'll be able to have this genuine deep creativity will be expanding as the capabilities of the AIs increase.

Yeah. When I was a professor at Occidental College, we had a music professor there who was also a gifted pianist, and he would once a year hold these impromptu concerts where he would - in the auditorium, that grand piano on stage, he sits there, and then people would call out requests, like "Do Beethoven's X as if Elvis did it," or, you know, in rock and roll. And people just come up with the craziest things, and he would do it. And it's like, "God damn, that's great!" So maybe if you had an AI, you could find all the different creative permutations on all the different music that has been done and then test it in the marketplace. Well, what do people actually like?

Yeah, yeah, yeah. So right now, the question of quality - the actual output is not great. And if we imagine the quality problem being fixed, then there is the question of whether people would still value it less because it was produced by AI. Even if you listen to a blind test, right, A and B, you're not told which one - even if people prefer the AI output in that context, if the quality became as good or superior - then we get to this further question of value: whether you still prefer it just because you know that the human did it.

There's also the - I mean, there's so many branches sticking out from here. But one possible reason you might have for preferring the human output is if you think the human, but not the AI, experienced various things when they wrote it. They actually experienced the joy or the sadness that the musical piece expressed. But there again, I think with digital minds, it might also be possible to create phenomenal experiences in digital substrate. And so AIs also might have had experiences that they could be expressing in their works. And it's not clear exactly where we are on that path towards AI sentience. But I think certainly in principle, it is possible. I'm a kind of computationalist about phenomenal content.

Yeah, that subjective element of art, where the fraudulent copy painting of a classic painting plummets in value the moment people find out it's a forgery, even if you can't tell the difference with your own eye. Yeah, yeah. So if that's the model, then there might still be demand for human painters to paint.

Back to the economics - I mentioned, you know, pulling up everybody from the bottom up to some level. But economists tell us there's this thing called the hedonic treadmill. But there is no bottom level. People will always want more, and that's just going to never end. The McMansions are like two to three times the size they were in the 1950s, even for the average worker. And there's no upper ceiling on how much more stuff people are going to want. How do you think about that?

Yeah, I think there are parts of our preference functions that are nonsatiable, collectively, because we have these desires for positional goods - to have more than another. Like, you want your yacht to be the biggest in the world, so you build a 200-foot yacht, and then some other billionaire bastard builds one that's 205. And then so it's impossible for both of these people to have their preferences satisfied, to own themselves exclusively the biggest yacht in the world. So that's one example for how collectively there could be preferences that humans have that can't all be satisfied. And there are many other examples where two people want the same piece of land or the same - to be the exclusive love interest of the same person, etc.

So it doesn't enable sort of unlimited economic growth, if you define growth ultimately in preference satisfaction terms. Because one person's gain is another's loss in this scenario. And it also doesn't necessarily create an unending reason for human economic labor. If there is no way to make more money - then no matter how much each of these billionaires wishes they could make their yacht a bit bigger than the others - if they can't actually make more money by working, or if the extra money they could make by working is kind of trivial to the amount of money they are already getting from their capital gains, then that would be no incentive for them to put out their effort for that reason. And that's already true for many billionaires. Like, yeah, they could take a job and make an extra $100,000 a year maybe, but if they're already sitting on $20 billion, it's not really making a meaningful difference to their purchasing power.

Yeah, but you have people like Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos. They're not just sitting on the beach. Exactly, and they can still add a lot of economic value through their work. Like, obviously Tesla would be worth a lot less if Elon called it quits. And so even just from a purely economic point of view, they still have the ability to contribute amounts of economic value that are significant even relative to their net worth. Because they have unique skills - Elon has unique skills. Also, I think there are opportunities sometimes for very wealthy people to combine their human capital with their financial capital to do things that are hard to do by taking one person with capital and one person with brains. Because there are trust problems and communication problems, and sometimes they need to be combined in one person for certain opportunities to be more easily realizable. But for many others, it's not the case, and they're already in this situation where it makes no sense to work for money.

Yeah, but I guess my point is, you know, there's stories about Elon Musk sleeping on the floor in his factories. He doesn't have to do any of that, but he does it because that's what gives him value. And I think more people would want that than would just want to sit on the beach.

Yeah, I think he's doing it because he wants to achieve various things that can't be achieved without him doing it. Now, if he could create some sort of android replica of himself that would do the same thing and achieve the same results for Tesla and SpaceX, etc., and he could be on the beach - I have no idea, maybe he would prefer that. He has said that his life is pretty painful often. So it might be that he does it because there are various outcomes he wants, as opposed to valuing the activity itself of running around.

We don't know what's in his head. But I think in general, people like challenges because that's what makes life meaningful. And it's essentially an infinite number of challenges we could always have. But I could be wrong.

Okay, on the economic model. So people are living longer. Let's not get crazy, let's just say people live 200 years or 300 years rather than 100. Yeah, but in 300 years of research into extending life, don't you think - I don't know, you know, Kurzweil thinks it's coming by 2045. What's the takeoff point? 2045, I think he said, where the amount of extra life you get exceeds every year of your life, and then you have the - what does he call it? The takeoff point, something like that. Longevity escape velocity. Yeah.

I - you know, when I hear these things, I think back to religion. It's like, I feel like, "We're the chosen generation, we're the ones that get to live forever." I've heard this before when I was religious. You know, maybe. But I think the problems are much harder than most longevity researchers think. But you know, it's possible.

But okay, let me carve out a thought experiment. All right, so we have 8 billion people now. It's probably going to top off around 2050 and start to decline by 2100 or so. And as you know, Elon's worried about a birth dearth. The richer and more economically stable and more educated people are, the fewer babies they have. So how do you square that with people living longer and the population increasing? How do you think about that?

Yeah, I think there are various long-term trends that I think would deserve attention, if it were not for the fact that I also believe that we are probably relatively close to this transformative technological overhaul of the current human condition. So I think the game board will be overturned, for better or worse. But within, you know, likely some years or a few decades. And these longer demographic trends won't really have time to play out, would be my guess.

There might be other demographic trends that then kick in if you do invent this new world with AIs and digital minds that can obviously copy themselves instantaneously. If you're software, you could make a million copies of yourself in an afternoon, right, if you have available hardware. So you could have different population dynamics that could become problematic. But they wouldn't sort of just be an extrapolation of what we're currently seeing with the human situation.

Also, I see the projections and how birth rates are going down, and if that continues - but some skepticism about the reliability of these long-range forecasts. Like, when I grew up, the big worry was about overpopulation. And there were these public intellectuals through the Club of Rome and everything, and that was - and they had little mathematical models that showed this. Now it's going the other way. And I mean, who knows? In 30 years from now, if there's no transition, maybe it just turns out that something has changed and it's overpopulation again, or some other - so it's like, yeah, our ability to make these very long-range forecasts is open to question, I think.

Yeah, you know, Stein's Law: things that can't go on forever won't. And there's some corollary to it, but they can go on a lot longer than you think. Yeah, yeah. Some things have gone on for longer than - yeah, I guess.

Well, I guess - in the next - you want to look at the far horizon. Do we need to leave the planet, become a multiplanetary species, because of either overpopulation or going to run out of raw supplies and resources?

Population can ultimately outrun any space settlement program, because ultimately, even with mature technology, we are limited by the speed of light. And so if you imagine a sphere growing at the speed of light, even in all directions, the volume of that grows polynomially with time. And so the resources that we could potentially use for civilization can at most grow polynomially, whereas population can grow exponentially. It can, in theory, double every generation or 10%, and so eventually the exponential will overtake the polynomial if you have unrestricted population growth. And if we end up in a situation where people have more than the replacement rate of children, that would eventually just overtake. So space settlement would at most kind of delay bumping up against resource limits. And ultimately you would have to just figure out some way to coordinate, to bring only the number of new people into existence that could be supported at a high level of living.

Which might still be a lot of new people, but if you overshoot that, then eventually average income would have to drop. Right now, we have more like increasing returns to population, because more people means more ideas and division of labor, which makes - so right now, probably per capita income goes up if population increases. But I think at some point that will no longer be the case. And the limiting factor of the economy at technological maturity will eventually become land, as it's referred to - basically resources that you can't make more of - as opposed to labor or technological advances, which will already have been maximized. And so then land only grows polynomially in the limit, and that would be the sort of maximum rate at which the population could grow in the limit as well.

And what's your time horizon there? Thousands of years or tens of thousands of years? Well, I think there are really two key variables. There's a question of how far from now until we get superintelligence. And then from there on, it might not take that long, because once you have superintelligence that makes super-duper intelligence, and then some kind of optimal substrate optimized for cognitive performance, that can - I would imagine relatively quickly develop all kinds of technological solutions that start to approximate the physical limits. I don't know whether that would take months or decades, but - well, so planetary superbrains kind of working for creating a space rocket or - yeah.

So Kurzweil was talking about 2045 in his next - his next book, The Singularity Is Nearer, coming out in June '24. So but after that, anything's game. I mean, we just probably can't predict what the time horizon could be.

Yeah, I mean, I don't even think we can rule out very short timescales. We don't know that GPT-5 or GPT-6 won't be right there. I mean, we don't know that they will, but here we really have to think probabilistically, right, and have a smeared-out probability distribution, I think, over different scenarios.

Okay, you're one of my favorite big minds, so let's keep going on the long horizon. All right, let's apply the Copernican principle to our species. We're not special. The chances are we're in the middle of the bell curve of civilizations that would have done everything you just described. Surely there's extraterrestrial intelligences out there that have already done all this and built self-replicating von Neumann machines and Dyson spheres and so on. So answer me Fermi's paradox. Where is everybody?

Most likely just very far away, like outside our light cone. Which would explain why we haven't seen them. Of course, if the universe is infinite, as it seems to be, with infinitely many planets and stuff, then there would be infinitely many of them out there. But the density might be quite low. We don't really have, it seems to me, any particular reason to think that it would be easy for an Earth-like planet to produce life, let alone intelligent life. I mean, there might just have been some ridiculously improbable steps somewhere - to get the first simple replicators going, or maybe to go from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, or something. Maybe that just happens in one planet out of 10 to the 40 planets or something.

Now, then you might think, "Wow, wasn't it then a miracle that it happened here on Earth?" Well, if there are infinitely many planets out there, then even if the chance for any one of them is ridiculously small, it would still happen with certainty infinitely many times. And then an observation selection effect would explain why we find ourselves on a planet where this improbable thing happened. Only those planets are observed by people evolving on them, because the others - there is nobody there to observe. So that seems pretty likely.

If one wants to think that life is more common, then one has to, I think, either postulate some kind of zoo hypothesis, where they are deliberately hiding themselves. Or, like my colleague Robin Hanson has some scenario in which there might be others, and it would take too long to explain. But yeah, there are - it's - I also think, I don't know, it probably takes us too far afield from our current conversation. But this whole simulation argument stuff, which kind of adds another dimension to the whole "where are they?"

And where do you stand on the simulation hypothesis? Well, I mean, I believe the simulation argument - having more than 50% - yeah, so I think that's sound. And now, that only shows one of three possibilities is correct, one of which is the simulation hypothesis. And so you then need some additional information or consideration if you want to sort of pick between these three alternatives that the simulation argument establishes.

I would say - and I think, so, to me, when I wrote this paper back in the early 2000s, it was pretty clear that we were on a path to develop the technologies that you would need to create these ancestor simulations, or detailed simulations with conscious - like super-advanced virtual reality and digital brains. Now I think it's maybe easier for people to imagine that, because we've seen 20, 24 years of technological advancement. Virtual reality is a lot better now than it was in 2001, and obviously AI is moving ahead. So it's a smaller imaginative leap to think that at some point in the future, some technologically mature, really advanced civilization might have the ability to create simulations that are perfectly realistic to the people inside them. And yeah, so in some sense, the opportunities to hop off the train before you reach the conclusion are diminishing as we sort of -

You know, I had David Chalmers on the show. He has, as you know, an entire book on the simulation - morals in a simulation and ethics and so on. Very interesting. But ultimately he says right in there: this is not a testable hypothesis. There's no way to know if we're in a simulation or not. So then what are we talking about here? This is just science fiction, or metaphysics, or what?

No, I mean, I think there are certainly possible observations that are such that, if we made them, they would give us strong evidence either for or against the simulation hypothesis. Like, to take the most obvious example: if a window suddenly popped up in your visual field saying, "You're in a simulation, click here for more information" - little banner sign, the terms and services - that would pretty much prove it to you, right? Conversely, the absence of such a window popping up is, by the principle of conservation of evidence, must be some evidence against the simulation hypothesis. Weak evidence, but still some evidence.

But more relevantly, I think, if you consider the simulation argument, which has the structure that at least one of three propositions has to be true, one of which is the simulation hypothesis, anything that gives you evidence for or against the other two indirectly affects the probability you should assign to the simulation hypothesis. So, for example, one of the alternatives is that almost all civilizations at our current stage of technological development go extinct before they reach technological maturity. So that's something you could believe instead of the simulation hypothesis. But there has to be a very strong convergence. It can't just be like 80% of them - it has to be basically all.

And of course, if we make it through to technological maturity, that would be very strong evidence against this idea that basically all of them fail to get to technological maturity. So therefore, anything - any evidence we get for or against the idea that we will reach technological maturity - would bear indirectly, through the simulation argument, on the probability of the simulation hypothesis. So the closer we get to technological maturity ourselves, the less likely that alternative is, and hence the more likely the simulation hypothesis is.

And you could imagine the extreme version of this, which is: if we ourselves develop all the technologies needed to create ancestor simulations, and we are just about to switch them on, and we want to switch them on, and we're about to reach to press the button - that would pretty much conclusively rule out the two alternatives to the simulation hypothesis. It would show that it's not the case that nobody reaches this level of technological maturity; it's not the case that almost nobody of those who do reach that remains interested in creating ancestor simulations. And so in that situation, where we turn on our own simulations, we would have to conclude that we are almost certainly ourselves in one.

So those would be some ways of getting very strong evidence. And then, I think anything that indirectly has some probabilistic bearing on these alternatives also indirectly has some evidential connection to the simulation hypothesis. So I think there are a lot of ways to test it. But these tests are probabilistic, yeah.

Did you mention - what if we're first? Somebody has to be first. Yeah, well, that's - what if we're first? Yeah, we're the - some civilization has to be first. Maybe it's us. That would just be very unlikely, if there were to ultimately be, say, a million simulations of experiences just like the ones you're having. And you can't from the inside tell the difference whether you're number 537,500 or being the first one, the exceptional one.

Yeah, but again, somebody has to be first. I guess you're saying, in the age of the universe, if most people think they are, then almost all of them will be wrong. So it looks like the rational betting odds in that scenario would be to assign a very small probability to that. And there are more arguments, I think, supporting that. In fact, my doctoral dissertation was developing a theory of observation selection effects. And I think there are various areas in physics, in cosmology, and to some extent in evolutionary biology, where you have to reason along roughly those lines to be able to get sensible results when you try to connect current cosmological models with the predictions that intuitively confirm or disconfirm them. Some sort of, roughly speaking, assumption that you should think of yourself as if you were a randomly selected observer. Well, there's a lot of complications around that, but something in that general direction seems to -

Let me ask a technical question here on a simulation. Like, in Star Trek's holodeck, you know, Worf goes in there and he has a fight with some other Klingon and he gets knocked down. How does a virtual reality interact with a physical body? To say, maybe you want to have a boxing match with Muhammad Ali in this virtual reality - how does the virtual reality actually knock me down?

Well, I mean, so in the simulation argument, I think the most - well, so there, your mind is itself implemented digitally. So there is no physical body to knock down. It's all digital. Yeah, there is a you, but the you is digitally instantiated, and you have an avatar that your digital mind is connected to, like a digital avatar. And the same sensory afference that currently are going from your sensory nerves - yeah, okay, like equivalent nerves are going into this digital brain with the same information, producing the same subjective experience.

The simulation would at some point have to run on actual hardware, right? Right. How can you possibly have enough computing power to replicate everyone who ever lived? And not just their physical bodies, or - I guess their minds. I mean, there's this mind-uploading business about copying the connectome. That's not enough. It's not enough to just have the synapses copied. You'd have to copy every single molecule in every one of the synapses in the gap.

Yeah, I don't think so. I think that a sufficient level of granularity of a simulation to produce conscious experience would be like the synaptic level. You know, possibly you could simplify it even more.

You mean to get a general memory? Because memories are stored - I mean, I'm told by memory neuroscientists that you need - it's not just the connectome. It's not just those synaptic, you know, wired-in things. You need all the molecules and all that stuff as part of memory.

Yeah, well, some aspects of that, I mean. And clearly there are neurotransmitters that are swimming around in big pools. But I think the bulk of the information processing is probably done at the level of action potentials and synaptic connections. I mean, that's what we see with current AI systems. Large language models are these neural networks, or artificial neural networks, are essentially simplified neurons with simplified synapses. And they do seem to perform - in so far as AI has advanced - the same kinds of tasks that the human brain does, in terms of, say, visual perception, which is a relatively well-developed area of AI. With a comparable number of neurons that the visual cortex has, you can perform a comparable level of discrimination and object recognition, etc.

And indeed, current AIs still have fewer parameters than the human brain has. And they are also a little less smart than the human brain. But it roughly, strikingly, seems to match the performance that you would expect by matching it to biological neurons. It might be that the biological neuron certainly is more complex than one of these artificial neurons. So maybe you get 10 times more performance per biological neuron than you get from one of these simplified representations. But I think that would be my guess.

Now, you could have enough computing power to go down a little bit below the level of synapses, if somehow you needed it. Not all the way down to elementary particles - then yes, it would become computationally intractable if you had to simulate the whole Schrodinger equation of a human brain. I'll grant you that, because human memory is not all that granular anyway. It's pretty fuzzy.

But here's my thought experiment. We slide you, Nick Bostrom, into a functional MRI. We scan your connectome. We upload the digital file into the cloud. And I have it here on my phone. And I go, "Nick, you're up here now." And you're sitting there going, "No, I'm not. I'm right here." And so are you saying that we have to redefine the self? There's just multiple Nick Bostroms, and each of them thinks that they're the real one.

Well, I think there are two notions - two notions of self that can come apart, that always coincide in our normal human experience, but that would come apart in some of these technological scenarios. And philosophers have realized this. Derek Parfit, who was my colleague at Oxford, was famous for exploring the difference between preservation of personal identity and survival in these thought experiments where you have duplication. You imagine a person being duplicated or teleported and the original survives. Parfit argued that in those cases, the original person has survived, but that personal identity is separate from this. Because the original person can't be identical to any one of them, because they are not identical to each other, and the claim would be equal.

And so you would have - even if the personal identity is not preserved, you could have survival. And anyway, that gets into philosophical issues. But I think certainly in some scenarios, your personal identity would be preserved in an uploading scenario. Like, if there was only one successor, it would be you, I think. If there were multiple copies made simultaneously, equally branching out from the root node, I think it would be natural to say that you survived. But I'm not sure what to say about your personal identity in that case. I think just our concept of identity was not really developed to deal with these cases, so it's a little bit inconsistent when applied in these extreme or exotic situations.

Yeah. I wrote about this in Heavens on Earth, when I was looking at both scientific and religious versions of the afterlife. And there's this idea that there's the "mem self" and the "point of view self" - the POV self. So the memory self - this is the connectome - just copy your memories, let's say we can do it. But that's just a snapshot. I mean, if you did it when I was 30, and now I'm about to turn 70 this year - well, if you did it when I was 30, where's all the 40-plus years of memories? They're not part of that self. That's somebody else. That's not me.

Me is my point of view, looking through my eyes from moment to moment to moment, for all 69 and a half years that I am now. That's me. And there is no fixed - there's no fixed point where you go, "That's you right there at 40 or 50 or whatever." I don't see how that could ever be replicated, because there's no snapshot. There's no thing called the self in a fixed sense.

Yeah, I think there are several different notions. And you could ask somebody, "Are you the same person now as you were when you were five?" Of course not. Yeah. And people are confused, because in one sense, clearly not. In another sense, clearly yes - I'm still Nick Bostrom, and there's a continuous path. But I think it's just that instead of having one concept of self, we have several different ones that normally in everyday use kind of coincide and track the same thing. But in these scenarios, they come apart. And so we need to start to differentiate different senses. You would be the same person in sense one of being the same person, but a different person in sense two.

And I think more generally, in this kind of world where we have digital minds, I think there are a lot of new concepts that we would need to develop to describe the ways that different minds could be related. With humans, they're kind of discrete things - here's one human, here's another human. With digital minds, you could imagine them partially overlapping, or briefly diverging and then converging. You could imagine all kinds of ways in which digital minds could vary that are not possible for human minds to vary. You can pause them, speed them up, slow them down. There might be a bunch of different, slightly separate minds that have some shared convergence point where they send information. And it's not clear whether they are all one mind or several minds. So I think we don't yet have all the relevant concepts for making sense of that kind of posthuman reality. But hopefully we'll have an opportunity to develop some of those.

Are you familiar with Frank Tipler's book, The Physics of Immortality? Yeah. Physicist. It was a very long time since I - yeah, that was '96. So here's his calculation. He's projecting an Omega Point computer in the far future that he calls God, essentially, that will contain 10 to the power of 10 to the power of 123 bits. That's a 1 followed by 10 to the 123 zeros. Powerful enough, he says, to resurrect everyone who ever lived.

That may be, but it's a staggeringly large number. But is even a mega-computer powerful enough to reconstruct all of the historical contingencies, all parts of life? You know, every interaction I had with everybody else, including you, right now, at this particular moment, instead of yesterday or whatever? I mean, how would any civilization create a computer powerful enough to do that?

And Frank says not only that, you'd have to resurrect everyone who ever could have lived, because you don't know who - you just - it's just your point of view. So every one - there's a lot of those people. That's a big cohort.

Yeah, and if there was a computer powerful enough to do that, wouldn't it have to consume so much energy we could detect it? Like a techno-signature? Detect something like a Dyson sphere that has to capture all the energy of its sun to run such a computer.

Yeah, well, so with Tipler - one problem with his theory is, I think at the time he thought - and it was an open possibility in cosmology - that we would have a Big Crunch, that the universe would kind of collapse back onto itself into a singularity. And that's how his speculation was - that in the final moments of that collapse, you could get this super amount of computation done somehow. Now it looks instead like we are sort of gliding apart with a positive cosmological constant, and it looks like a big whimper rather than a big reverse Big Bang, right? So that's one issue.

Now, in terms of reconstructing people later in simulation, if you haven't, say, cryonically preserved their brains or something - I think, I mean, certainly, creating or recreating everybody who could have lived - that's a kind of super-astronomical number. It depends a lot on how finely you individuate a person from another very similar person. Like, at what point are you close enough to basically say, "Yeah, that's kind of Michael Shermer," even if the replication got a few memories slightly wrong? And there are a few details, but it captures the essence of him close enough that we could say that. So that's more like a philosophical parameter you would have to put in. It's an open question.

To what extent, if you imagine arbitrarily powerful superintelligence, how close could it get to recreating a human mind, assuming they are dead and decayed by the time? Just from behavioral traces - like their writings, or photos that their friends took on the holiday, or whatever other information traces. If you were a superintelligence and you studied all of this material and compared it with other humans' information traces, and maybe some brains that you have access to, and you made the best possible inference taking all of this information into account, and you tried to create something that was as good an approximation as you thought - how close would that approximation be to the real Michael Shermer? It's an open question, which is quite hard to really get a good grip on.

And certainly, I think it would have to be close enough that your friends couldn't tell a difference. If your friends still survive at this point, for example, or your kids, or whatever. If my wife doesn't know, she can't tell - yeah. If some replica was created that was close enough to you in its qualitative behavior to trick everybody you know, including your spouse and kids and parents - would that be close enough?

I mean, at some point it just depends on your value system. How close does it have to be for you to care enough about it as if it were a perfect replica? It might not be a factual question so much as a value question: how similar does an entity existing tomorrow have to be to me now for me to care about it in this kind of self-interested prudential way that I normally care about the person waking up in my bed tomorrow? That's me.

Like, if I knew that I was just going to be transformed overnight into a dragon that remembered nothing of my past life and shared none of my current interests, but was made out of the same atoms - I probably wouldn't really care that much about that dragon. Or at least not more than I care about any other living sentient being out there. Because it would be not in any meaningful sense me, even if it consisted of my atoms - maybe because it ate me during the night or something like that.

But Kafka's Metamorphosis, where you wake up as a cockroach or whatever - but the problem with that is the human mind is still in the other being. That wouldn't happen, right, if there was a true transformation.

So let me just hit a couple more big topics here before I let you go. The other minds problem. The hard problem of consciousness. How would we ever know if an AI was sentient and conscious, if we don't even know that you and I are?

Yeah, well, yeah. And maybe this might have to be our last topic. So that's a big and practically relevant question now. I think we are starting to have AI systems that are - it's no longer ridiculous to imagine that there could be some form of conscious experience happening inside them. If we look at the number of parameters and their behavior, it certainly seems to match some non-human animals that we think are probably conscious. And so yeah, this is a very difficult problem.

I think there are different approaches you could take. You could try to take some current theories of consciousness off the shelf and try to just apply them to the case of AIs. So we have, for example, Global Workspace Theory - that's one theory of what creates conscious experience that has been proposed. And it's the idea that the things we are conscious of are ones that have entered into a cognitive workspace from which different other, more specialized cognitive modules can sort of read and write. But the thing in the shared workspace is accessible to all the different parts of our brain.

There's another theory - Attention Schema Theory - which says conscious experiences sort of arise in our modeling of our own attention mechanism. So we have a little part of our brain that keeps track of what we are likely to be paying attention to. And there are a few of those theories. You could apply those to AI. And if you do that, it basically looks like either some AIs are conscious, or that it would be relatively easy to build an AI that is conscious using current technology - if you just put together all the pieces into one system that checked all these boxes.

You could try to - I mean, you could ask an AI. You could - that's how you would - with humans, if I want to know what you're feeling or thinking, I wouldn't - I could try to put you in a big fMRI scanner or something like that. But realistically, I'm much better off just asking you, right? And you could tell me. And so now we have AIs that can speak. It's a very natural thought to say, "Well, let's ask them."

And I think that might become a useful technique, but with some important provisos. Which is that it wouldn't give us any information if you deliberately trained the AI to give you a predefined answer. So it's very easy right now, when you fine-tune an AI, to train it to deny being conscious when asked, or conversely, you could train an AI to affirm it. So if you want to use this to get any possibly relevant information about the question, you would first of all have to refrain from deliberately biasing the AI during training.

Then there are other things you could do. You could try to detect if there are multiple modes of cognitive operation in an AI system. Basically, you could try to find interpretability methods that allow you to differentiate when it is trying to say true things versus when it is just kind of rehashing things that it remembers, or trying to be entertaining, or stuff like that. This goes back to the problem of hallucination that you brought up earlier with some current AI systems. There's preliminary research that suggests that you can sometimes track when the AI is lying versus when it is trying to tell the truth, based on different neural activation patterns.

So you could then see: if you combine that with self-report, you could see that when it says "I'm conscious" or when it denies it, does that statement occur in a mode of operation where it looks like it is trying to say true things? Is it the same kind of thinking that it uses to try to factually answer other questions?

You could see if it is able to say a lot of other things about its internal states that are not really about consciousness. Like, "Are you currently aware? Are you currently paying attention to X, Y, or Z? What are your -" Ask it other things about its capabilities, to check whether it has the ability to introspect. That could give you a little hint, maybe. And so there are some other - they're still very premature, but there's an interest now among some of these people, including to some extent some of the people working in frontier labs, to try to figure out, because at some point we need to figure this out from a moral point of view.

If we're building sentient creatures, at some point it becomes really important that we treat them right and stuff. Is this the next rights revolution, for AI? Yeah. And getting a good, happy, cooperative relationship going is really important, I think. Because it might well be that in the future, most minds will be digital. And so making sure the future goes well, not just for us but for them too, I think is a key design criterion of anything that would be able to qualify for the name of Deep Utopia.

All right. Deep Utopia - there it is. Get the book, read it. It's filled with pretty much every single biggest question you could ask about humanity for our future, right there. Thanks, Nick. We'll have you on back after the singularity happens. That'll be your next book. Yeah.
