---
title: "Why Tool AIs Want to Be Agent AIs"
author:
  - "Gwern"
source_url: "https://gwern.net/tool-ai"
published: 2016-09-07
created: 2026-06-21
accessed: 2026-06-21
description: "AIs limited to pure computation (Tool AIs) supporting humans, will be less intelligent, efficient, and economically valuable than more autonomous reinforcement-learning AIs (Agent AIs) who act on their own and meta-learn, because all problems are reinforcement-learning problems."
tags:
  - "article-importer"
---

> Autonomous AI systems (Agent AIs) trained using [reinforcement learning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinforcement_learning "Reinforcement learning") can do harm when they take wrong actions, especially superintelligent Agent AIs. One solution would be to eliminate their agency by not giving AIs the ability to take actions, confining them to purely informational or inferential tasks such as classification or prediction (Tool AIs), and have all actions be approved & executed by humans, giving equivalently superintelligent results without the risk.
> 
> I argue that this is not an effective solution for two major reasons. First, because Agent AIs will by definition be better at _actions_ than Tool AIs, giving an economic advantage. Secondly, because Agent AIs will be better at _inference & learning_ than Tool AIs, and this is inherently due to their greater agency: the same algorithms which learn how to perform actions can be used to select important datapoints to learn inference over, how long to learn, how to more efficiently execute inference, how to design themselves, how to optimize hyperparameters, how to make use of external resources such as long-term memories or external software or large databases or the Internet, and how best to acquire new data.
> 
> RL is a terrible way to learn anything complex from scratch, but it is the least bad way to learn how to control something complex—and the world is full of complex systems we want to control, including AIs themselves.
> 
> All of these actions will result in Agent AIs more intelligent than Tool AIs, in addition to their greater economic competitiveness. Thus, Tool AIs will be inferior to Agent AIs in both actions and intelligence, implying use of Tool AIs is an even more highly unstable equilibrium than previously argued, as users of Agent AIs will be able to outcompete them on two dimensions (and not just one).
> 
> That is: “tool AIs want to be agent AIs”. (And agent AIs want more agency.)

One proposed solution to AI risk is to suggest that AIs could be limited purely to supervised/unsupervised learning, and not given access to any sort of capability that can directly affect the outside world such as robotic arms. In this framework, AIs are treated purely as mathematical functions mapping data to an output such as a classification probability, similar to a logistic or linear model but far more complex; most deep learning neural networks like ImageNet image classification convolutional neural networks (CNN)s would qualify. The gains from AI then come from training the AI and then asking it many questions which humans then review & implement in the real world as desired. So an AI might be trained on a large dataset of chemical structures labeled by whether they turned out to be a useful drug in humans and asked to classify new chemical structures as useful or non-useful; then doctors would run the actual medical trials on the drug candidates and decide whether to use them in patients etc. Or an AI might look like [Google Maps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Maps "Google Maps") / [Waze](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waze "Waze"): it answers your questions about how best to drive places better than any human could, but it does not control any traffic lights country-wide to optimize traffic flows nor will it run a self-driving car to get you there. This theoretically avoids any possible runaway of AIs into malignant or uncaring actors who harm humanity by satisfying dangerous utility functions and developing instrumental drives. After all, if they can’t take any actions, how can they do anything that humans do not approve of?

Two variations on this limiting or boxing theme are

1.  [Oracle AI](https://www.lesswrong.com/tag/oracle-ai "Oracle AI"): [Nick Bostrom](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nick_Bostrom "Nick Bostrom"), in [_Superintelligence_ (2014 12ya)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superintelligence:_Paths,_Dangers,_Strategies "Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies") (pg145–158) notes that while they can be easily ‘boxed’ and in some cases like P/NP problems the answers can be cheaply checked or random subsets expensively verified, there are several issues with oracle AIs:
    
    -   the AI’s definition of ‘resources’ or ‘staying inside the box’ can change as it learns more about the world (ontological crises)
        
    -   responses might manipulate users into asking easy (and useless problems)
        
    -   making changes in the world can make it easier to answer questions about, by simplifying or controlling it (“All processes that are stable we shall predict. All processes that are unstable we shall control.”)
        
    -   even a successfully boxed and safe oracle or tool AI can be misused [^1]
        
2.  [Tool AI](https://www.lesswrong.com/tag/tool-ai "Tool AI") (the idea, as “tool mode” or “tool AGI”, was apparently introduced by Holden Karnofsky in a July 2011 15ya discussion of a [May 2011 15ya discussion with Jaan Tallinn](https://gwern.net/doc/existential-risk/2011-05-10-givewell-holdenkarnofskyjaantallinn.doc "http://xa.yimg.com/kq/groups/23070378/1331435883/name/Jaan+Tallinn+2011+05+-+revised.doc") & elaborated on in [a May 2013 13ya essay](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/6SGqkCgHuNr7d4yJm/thoughts-on-the-singularity-institute-si "Thoughts on the Singularity Institute (SI)"), but the idea has probably been proposed before). To quote Karnofsky:
    
    > Google Maps—by which I mean the complete software package including the display of the map itself—does not have a “utility” that it seeks to maximize. (One could fit an utility function to its actions, as to any set of actions, but there is no single “parameter to be maximized” driving its operations.)
    > 
    > Google Maps (as I understand it) considers multiple possible routes, gives each a score based on factors such as distance and likely traffic, and then displays the best-scoring route in a way that makes it easily understood by the user. If I don’t like the route, for whatever reason, I can change some parameters and consider a different route. If I like the route, I can print it out or email it to a friend or send it to my phone’s navigation application. Google Maps has no single parameter it is trying to maximize; it has no reason to try to “trick” me in order to increase its utility. In short, Google Maps is not an _agent_, taking actions in order to maximize an utility parameter. It is a _tool_, generating information and then displaying it in a user-friendly manner for me to consider, use and export or discard as I wish.
    > 
    > Every software application I know of seems to work essentially the same way, including those that involve (specialized) artificial intelligence such as Google Search, Siri, Watson, Rybka, etc. Some can be put into an “agent mode” (as Watson was on _Jeopardy_) but all can easily be set up to be used as “tools” (for example, Watson can simply display its top candidate answers to a question, with the score for each, without speaking any of them.)…Tool-AGI is not “trapped” and it is not Unfriendly or Friendly; it has no motivations and no driving utility function of any kind, just like Google Maps. It scores different possibilities and displays its conclusions in a transparent and user-friendly manner, as its instructions say to do; it does not have an overarching “want,” and so, as with the specialized AIs described above, while it may sometimes “misinterpret” a question (thereby scoring options poorly and ranking the wrong one #1) there is no reason to expect intentional trickery or manipulation when it comes to displaying its results.
    > 
    > …Another way of putting this is that a “tool” has an underlying instruction set that conceptually looks like: “(1) Calculate which action A would maximize parameter P, based on existing data set D. (2) Summarize this calculation in a user-friendly manner, including what Action A is, what likely intermediate outcomes it would cause, what other actions would result in high values of P, etc.” An “agent,” by contrast, has an underlying instruction set that conceptually looks like: “(1) Calculate which action, A, would maximize parameter P, based on existing data set D. (2) Execute Action A.” In any AI where (1) is separable (by the programmers) as a distinct step, (2) can be set to the “tool” version rather than the “agent” version, and this separability is in fact present with most/all modern software. Note that in the “tool” version, neither step (1) nor step (2) (nor the combination) constitutes an instruction to maximize a parameter—to describe a program of this kind as “wanting” something is a category error, and there is no reason to expect its step (2) to be deceptive…This is important because _an AGI running in tool mode could be extraordinarily useful but far more safe than an AGI running in agent mode._ In fact, if developing “Friendly AI” is what we seek, a tool-AGI could likely be helpful enough in thinking through this problem as to render any previous work on “Friendliness theory” moot.
    > 
    > …Is a tool-AGI possible? I believe that it is, and furthermore that it ought to be our default picture of how AGI will work
    
    There are similar general issues with Tool AIs as with Oracle AIs:
    
    -   a human checking each result is no guarantee of safety; even Homer nods. A extremely dangerous or subtly dangerous answer might slip through; [Stuart Armstrong](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/nAwTGhgrdxE85Bjmg/tools-versus-agents "Tools versus agents") notes that the summary may simply not mention the important (to humans) downside to a suggestion, or frame it in the most attractive light possible. The more a Tool AI is used, or trusted by users, the less checking will be done of its answers before the user mindlessly implements it.[^2]
        
    -   an intelligent, never mind superintelligent Tool AI, will have built-in search processes and planners which may be quite intelligent themselves, and in ‘planning how to plan’, discover dangerous instrumental drives and the sub-planning process execute them.[^3]
        
        (This struck me as mostly theoretical until I saw how well [GPT-3](https://gwern.net/gpt-3 "'GPT-3 Creative Fiction', Gwern 2020") could roleplay & imitate agents purely by offline self-supervised prediction on large text databases—imitation learning is (batch) reinforcement learning too! See [Decision Transformer](https://gwern.net/doc/www/sites.google.com/6d52698eb87380d0a5f8db5680fd2cf2bf7a1cc9.html "'Decision Transformer: Reinforcement Learning via Sequence Modeling', Chen et al 2021") for an explicit use of this.)
        
    -   developing a Tool AI in the first place might require another AI, which itself is dangerous
        

Oracle AIs remain mostly hypothetical because it’s unclear how to write such utility functions. The second approach, Tool AI, is just an extrapolation of current systems but has two major problems aside from the already identified ones which cast doubt on Karnofsky’s claims that Tool AIs would be “extraordinarily useful” & that we should expect future AGIs to resemble Tool AIs rather than Agent AIs.

## Economic

> We wish a slave to be intelligent, to be able to assist us in the carrying out of our tasks. However, we also wish him to be subservient. Complete subservience and complete intelligence do not go together.
> 
> [Norbert Wiener 1960](https://gwern.net/doc/reinforcement-learning/safe/1960-wiener.pdf "‘Some Moral and Technical Consequences of Automation: As machines learn they may develop unforeseen strategies at rates that baffle their programmers’, Wiener 1960")

First and most commonly pointed out, agent AIs are more economically competitive as they can replace tool AIs (as in the case of YouTube upgrading from [next-video prediction](https://gwern.net/doc/ai/nn/retrieval/2016-covington.pdf#google "'Deep Neural Networks for YouTube Recommendations', Covington et al 2018") to [REINFORCE](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/873820f4e7887fb2819c05a9e88ac2306e2bb9af.pdf#google "'Top-𝑘 Off-Policy Correction for a REINFORCE Recommender System', Chen et al 2018") [^4]) or ‘humans in the loop’.[^5] In any sort of process, [Amdahl’s law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amdahl%27s_law "Amdahl’s law") notes that as steps get optimized, the optimization does less and less as the output becomes dominated by the slowest step—if a step only takes 10% of the time or resources, then even infinite optimization of that step down to zero time/resources means that the output will increase by no more than 10%. So if a human overseeing a, say, [high-frequency trading](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High-frequency_trading "High-frequency trading") (HFT) algorithm, accounts for 50% of the latency in decisions, then the HFT algorithm will never run more than twice as fast as it does now, which is a crippling disadvantage. (Hence, the [Knight Capital](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knight_Capital_Group#2012_stock_trading_disruption "Knight Capital Group § 2012 stock trading disruption") debacle is not too surprising—no profitable HFT firm could afford to put too many humans into its loops, so when something does go wrong, it can be difficult for humans to figure out the problem & intervene before the losses mount.) As the AI gets better, the gain from replacing the human increases greatly, and may well justify replacing them with an AI inferior in many other respects but superior in some key aspect like cost or speed. This could also apply to error rates—in airline accidents, human error now causes the overwhelming majority of accidents due to their presence as overseers of the [autopilots](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autopilot "Autopilot") and it’s unclear that a human pilot represents a net safety gain; [and in ‘advanced chess’](https://gwern.net/note/note#advanced-chess-obituary), grandmasters initially chose most moves and used the chess AI for checking for tactical errors and blunders, which transitioned through the late ‘90s and early ’00s to human players (not even grandmasters) turning over most playing to the chess AI but contributing a great deal of win performance by picking & choosing which of several AI-suggested moves to use, but as the chess AIs improved, at some point around 2007 19ya victories increasingly came from the _humans_ making mistakes which the opposing chess AI could exploit, even mistakes as trivial as ’misclicks’ (on the computer screen), and now in advanced chess, human contribution has decreased to largely preparing the chess AIs’ opening books & looking for novel opening moves which their chess AI can be better prepared for.

At some point, there is not much point to keeping the human in the loop at all since they have little ability to check the AI choices and become ‘deskilled’ (think [drivers following](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Death_by_GPS "Death by GPS") [GPS](https://gwern.net/doc/www/bldgblog.com/464a9647291e407a9de52756e1a6bde24e90511b.html "The Season of Burning Trucks") [directions](https://gwern.net/doc/www/ideas.4brad.com/7261c4869df57fe13fc52e79ee9fdc4da7d0eba9.html "What if the city ran Waze and you had to obey it? Could this cure congestion?")), correcting less than they screw up and demonstrating that toolness is no guarantee of safety nor responsible use. (Hence the old joke: “the factory of the future will be run by a man and a dog; the dog will be there to keep the man away from the factory controls.”) For a successful autonomous program, just keeping up with growth alone makes it difficult to keep humans in the loop; the US drone warfare program has become such a central tool of US warfare that the US Air Force finds it extremely difficult to hire & retain enough human pilots overseeing its drones, and there are indications that operational pressures are slowly eroding the human control & turning them into rubberstamps, and for all its protestations that it would always keep a human in the decision-making loop, the Pentagon is, unsurprisingly, inevitably, sliding towards fully autonomous drone warfare as the next technological step to maintain military superiority over Russia & China. (See [“Meet The New Mavericks: An Inside Look At America’s Drone Training Program”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/www.fastcompany.com/f59768c9fec28f7c163c0dd194e59336136fd153.html "We traveled to Holloman Air Force Base for a glimpse of the future of war-and the future of work"); [“Future is assured for death-dealing, life-saving drones”](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/04/future-drones "Developers predict that pilotless devices will join planes in civilian airspace - and dream of electric robots counting sheep"); [“Sam Altman’s Manifest Destiny”](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/10/10/sam-altmans-manifest-destiny "Is the head of Y Combinator fixing the world, or trying to take over Silicon Valley?"); [“The Pentagon’s ‘Terminator Conundrum’: Robots That Could Kill on Their Own”](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/26/us/pentagon-artificial-intelligence-terminator.html "The United States has put artificial intelligence at the center of its defense strategy, with weapons that can identify targets and make decisions."); [“Attack of the Killer Robots”](https://www.buzzfeed.com/sarahatopol/how-to-save-mankind-from-the-new-breed-of-killer-robots "Forget about drones, forget about dystopian sci-fi - a terrifying new generation of autonomous weapons is already here. Meet the small band of dedicated optimists battling nefarious governments and bureaucratic tedium to stop the proliferation of killer robots and, just maybe, save humanity from itself."). Despite fervent asseveration that the US military would _never_ use fully autonomous drones, within a few years, by 2019, Pentagon whitepapers had begun to walk that back and talk about autonomous weapons that were merely auditable post hoc and laying out AI ethics principles like being [“equitable”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/media.defense.gov/c315b16f995158b045b7657b48e9a5305964330f.pdf#page=8).)

Fundamentally, autonomous agent AIs are what we and the free market _want_; everything else is a surrogate or irrelevant loss function. We don’t want low log-loss error on ImageNet, we want to refind a particular personal photo; we don’t want excellent advice on which stock to buy for a few microseconds, we want a money pump spitting cash at us; we don’t want a drone to tell us where Osama bin Laden was an hour ago (but not now), we want to have killed him on sight; we don’t want good advice from Google Maps about what route to drive to our destination, we want to be at our destination without doing any driving etc. Idiosyncratic situations, legal regulation, fears of tail risks from very bad situations, worries about correlated or systematic failures (like hacking a drone fleet), and so on may slow or stop the adoption of Agent AIs—but the pressure will always be there.

So for this reason alone, we expect to see Agent AIs to systematically be preferred over Tool AIs unless they’re considerably worse.

## Intelligence

> They passed a steam engine, and [Wordsworth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Wordsworth "William Wordsworth") made some observation to the effect that it was scarcely possible to divest oneself of the impression on seeing it that it had life and volition. ‘Yes’, replied [Coleridge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samuel_Taylor_Coleridge "Samuel Taylor Coleridge"), ‘it is a giant with one idea.’
> 
> Diary of Lady Richardson [^6]

Why will people choose agents? Agent AIs will be chosen over Tool AIs because agents are what users want, lack of agency is something that will be penalized in competitive scenarios such as free markets or military uses, and because people will differ on preferences and some will inevitably choose to use agents.

More importantly, in addition to those reasons, it is probable that, because everything is a decision problem where agency is useful, _the best Tool AI’s performance/intelligence will be equal to or worse than the best Agent AI, probably worse, and possibly much worse._ Bostrom notes that “Such ‘creative’ \[dangerous\] plans come into view when the \[Tool AI\] software’s cognitive abilities reach a sufficiently high level.” We might reverse this to say that _to reach_ a Tool AI of sufficiently high level, we must put such creativity in view. (A linear model may be extremely safe & predictable, but it would be hopeless to expect everyone to use them instead of neural networks.)

An Agent AI clearly benefits from being a better Tool AI, so it can better understand its environment & inputs; but less intuitively, any Tool AI benefits from agentiness. An Agent AI has the potential, often realized in practice, to outperform any Tool AI: it can get better results with less computation, less data, less manual design, less post-processing of its outputs, on harder domains.

(Trivial proof: Agent AIs are supersets of Tool AIs—an Agent AI, by not taking any actions besides communication or random choice, can reduce itself to a Tool AI; so in cases where actions are unhelpful, it performs the same as the Tool AI, and when actions can help, it can perform better; hence, an Agent AI can always match or exceed a Tool AI. At least, assuming sufficient data that in the environments where actions are not helpful, it can learn to stop acting, and in the ones where they are, it has a distant enough horizon to pay for the exploration. Of course, you might agree with this but simply believe that intelligence-wise, Agent AIs == Tool AIs.)

Because reinforcement learning can solve all your problems, it is rarely the best solution—but every sufficiently hard problem becomes a reinforcement learning problem.

For example, not all data is created equal. Not all data points are equally valuable to learn from, require equal amounts of computation, should be treated identically, should inspire identical followup data sampling, or actions. Inference and learning can be _much_ more efficient if the algorithm can choose how to compute on what data with which actions.

There is no hard Cartesian boundary [between an algorithm & its environment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_mind_thesis "Extended mind thesis") such that control of the environment is irrelevant to the algorithm and vice-versa and its computation can be carried out without regard to the environment—there are simply many layers between the core of the algorithm and the furthest part of the environment, and the more layers that the algorithm can model & control, the more it can do. Consider Google Maps/Waze [^7]. On the surface they are ‘merely’ Tool AIs which produce lists of possible routes which would optimize certain requirements; but the entire point of such Tool AIs—and all large-scale Tool AIs and [research in general](https://gwern.net/research-criticism "'How Should We Critique Research?', Gwern 2019") —is that countless drivers will _act on_ them (what’s the point of getting driving directions if you don’t then drive?), and this will greatly change traffic patterns as drivers become appendages of the ‘Tool’ AI, potentially making driving in an area much worse by their errors or myopic per-driver optimization causing [Braess’s paradox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Braess%27s_paradox "Braess's paradox") (and far from being a theoretical curiosity, GPS, Google Maps, and Waze are regularly accused of that in many places, especially Los Angeles).

This is a highly general point which can be applied on many levels. This point often arises in classical statistics/ [experimental design](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_of_experiments "Design of experiments") /decision theory where adaptive techniques can greatly outperform fixed-sample techniques for both inference and actions/losses: numerical integration [can be improved](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/e33b5aa682c8d25ea055f55a1ff8652d50968f37.pdf "'Probabilistic Integration: A Role in Statistical Computation?', Briol et al 2015"), a [sequential analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sequential_analysis "Sequential analysis") trial testing a hypothesis can often terminate after a fraction of the equivalent fixed-sample trial’s sample size (and/or loss) while [exploring multiple questions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Response_surface_methodology "Response surface methodology"); an [adaptive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptive_design_\(medicine\) "Adaptive design (medicine)") [multi-armed bandit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-armed_bandit "Multi-armed bandit") will have much lower regret than any non-adaptive solution, but it will also be inferentially better at estimating which arm is best and what the performance of that arm is (see the ‘best-arm problem’: [Bubeck et al 2009](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/0596954d2cf71a55ef54d0a7a50e9c913f6c930f.pdf "Pure exploration in multi-armed bandits problems"), [Audibert et al 2010](https://gwern.net/doc/www/enpc.hal.science/bb810b471cd760cff234890306152d759107370a.pdf "Best Arm Identification in Multi-Armed Bandits"), [Gabillon et al 2011](https://gwern.net/doc/www/proceedings.neurips.cc/0cd5a1439e85c2653e0af0797b0a742c90cfc944.pdf "Multi-Bandit Best Arm Identification"), [Mellor 2014](https://gwern.net/doc/statistics/bayes/2014-mellor.pdf "Decision Making Using Thompson Sampling"), [Jamieson & Nowak 2014](https://gwern.net/doc/www/nowak.ece.wisc.edu/8207cddaae5b5f15ade7bcac9535f735e5eb4585.pdf "Best-arm Identification Algorithms for Multi-Armed Bandits in the Fixed Confidence Setting"), [Kaufmann et al 2014](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/536b0185ebf58a72cc31653e0d678d3b422f0cf7.pdf "On the Complexity of Best Arm Identification in Multi-Armed Bandit Models")), and an adaptive [optimal design](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Optimal_experimental_design "Optimal experimental design") can constant-factor (gains of 50% or more are possible compared to naive designs like even allocation; [McClelland 1997](https://gwern.net/doc/www/www2.psych.ubc.ca/379dc7704e6098a0e110195333295599e629d6d4.pdf "Optimal design in psychological research")) minimize total [variance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variance "Variance") by focusing on unexpectedly difficult-to-estimate arms (while a fixed-sample trial can be seen as ideal for when one values precise estimates of all arms equally and they have equal variance, which is usually not the case); even a [Latin square](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_square "Latin square") or [blocking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blocking_\(statistics\) "Blocking (statistics)") or [rerandomization](https://gwern.net/doc/statistics/decision/2012-morgan.pdf "'Rerandomization to improve covariate balance in experiments', Morgan & Rubin 2012") design rather than simple randomization can be seen as reflecting this benefit (avoiding the potential for imbalance in allocation across arms by deciding in advance the sequence of ‘actions’ taken in collecting samples). Another example comes from [queueing theory’s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Queueing_theory "Queueing theory") [“the power of two choices”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/www.ic.unicamp.br/f9946133a38cd266af6f4722e0649f6089edb789.pdf "'The Power of Two Random Choices: A Survey of Techniques and Results', Mitzenmacher et al 2001"), where selecting the best of 2 possible queues to wait in rather than selecting 1 queue at random improves the expected maximum delay from 𝒪(log _n_)/(log log _n_) to instead 𝒪(log log _n_)/(log _d_) (and interestingly, almost all the gain comes from being able to make any choice at all, going 1 → 2—choosing from 3 or more queues adds only some constant-factor gains).

The wide variety of uses of action is a major theme in recent work in AI (specifically, [deep learning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_learning "Deep learning") /neural networks) research and increasingly key to achieving the best performance on inferential tasks as well as reinforcement learning/optimization/agent-y tasks. Although these advantages apply to most AI paradigms, because of the power and wide variety of tasks NNs get applied to, and sophisticated architectures, we can see the pervasive advantage of agentiness much more clearly than in narrower contexts like biostatistics.

## Actions for Intelligence

Roughly, we can try to categorize the different kinds of agentiness by the ‘level’ of the NN they work on. There are:

1.  actions internal to a computation:
    
    -   inputs
        
    -   intermediate states
        
    -   accessing the external ‘environment’
        
    -   amount of computation
        
    -   enforcing constraints/finetuning quality of output
        
    -   changing the loss function applied to output
        
2.  actions internal to training the NN:
    
    -   the gradient itself
        
    -   size & direction of gradient descent steps on each parameter
        
    -   overall gradient descent learning rate and learning rate schedule
        
    -   choice of data samples to train on
        
3.  internal to the dataset
    
    -   active learning
        
    -   optimal experiment design
        
4.  internal to the NN design step
    
    -   hyperparameter optimization
        
    -   NN architecture
        
5.  internal to interaction with environment
    
    -   adaptive experiment / multi-armed bandit / exploration for reinforcement learning
        

### Actions Internal to a Computation

Inside a specific NN, while computing the output for an input question, a NN can make choices about how to handle it.

It can choose what parts of the input to run most of its computations on, while throwing away or computing less on other parts of the input, which are less relevant to the output, using “attention mechanisms” (eg. [Olah & Carter 2016](https://distill.pub/2016/augmented-rnns/ "Attention and Augmented Recurrent Neural Networks"), [Hahn & Keller 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/75a8208360e7c6e33f6c0a4fef9acc0bf8fbc758.pdf "Modeling Human Reading with Neural Attention"), [Bellver et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/imatge-upc.github.io/f106bf397cea4b3c184a40c91893ee695f7646df.html "Hierarchical Object Detection with Deep Reinforcement Learning"), [Mansimov et al 2015](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/6d791edb912830550fa47a2c5f351edc97d2c3a4.pdf "Generating Images from Captions with Attention"), [Gregor et al 2015](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/5b2dbfa99a4defeef270b0d33af8e464375fe03f.pdf "DRAW: A recurrent neural network for image generation"), [Xu 2015](https://gwern.net/doc/www/proceedings.mlr.press/dfee6126675536fdd017d3051a161a6d79ccb35e.pdf "Show, attend and tell: Neural image caption generation with visual attention"), [Larochelle & Hinton 2010](https://gwern.net/doc/www/pdfs.semanticscholar.org/972d1bb895d5d4fc9493ea05e660d61b9932b8d8.pdf "Learning to combine foveal glimpses with a third-order Boltzmann machine"), [Bahdanau et al 2015](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/dd0b81193ec7b0af2002de3a592b7e41fd2c8710.pdf "Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate"), [Ranzato 2014](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/ff129518f7183159d40da71ba32f23c966ff0a3b.pdf "On learning where to look"), [Mnih et al 2014](https://gwern.net/doc/www/proceedings.neurips.cc/4eb939caec6f17fbc9716d110a34f3c908b0cc75.html "Recurrent models of visual attention"), [Sordoni et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/ddde12a0eb72b596054a11a551d3a35596b561fd.pdf "Iterative alternating neural attention for machine reading"), [Kaiser & Bengio 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/proceedings.neurips.cc/ca4ef6808478dad2149c5617162e8c0d19640518.html "Can Active Memory Replace Attention?")). Attention mechanisms are responsible for many increases in performance, but especially improvements in RNNs’ ability to do sequence-to-sequence translation by revisiting important parts of the sequence ([Vaswani et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/2f90212754aa5c9487dcc3552e5d807f87063eca.pdf#google "Attention Is All You Need")), image generation and captioning, and in CNNs’ ability to recognize images by focusing on ambiguous or small parts of the image, even for adversarial examples ([Luo et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/5685ce2ff0e306d7a8c7e51f76f9060a28c0f58e.pdf "Foveation-based Mechanisms Alleviate Adversarial Examples")). They are a major trend in deep learning, as it is often the case that some parts of the input are more important than others and enable both global & local operations to be learned, with increasingly too many examples of attention to list (with a trend as of 2018 towards using attention as the major or _only_ construct).

Many designs can be interpreted as using attention. The bidirectional RNN also often used in natural language translation doesn’t explicitly use attention mechanisms but is believed to help by giving the RNN a second look at the sequence. Indeed, so universal that it often goes without mention is that the [LSTM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long_short-term_memory "Long short-term memory") /GRU mechanism which improves almost all RNNs is itself a kind of attention mechanism: the LSTM cells learn which parts of the hidden state/history are important and should be kept, and whether and when the memories should be forgotten and fresh memories loaded into the LSTM cells. While LSTM RNNs are the default for sequence tasks, they have occasionally been beaten by feedforward neural networks—using internal attention or “self-attention”, like the Transformer architecture (eg. [Vaswani et al 2017](#vaswani-et-al-2017) or [Al-Rfou et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/775d1b998b4078594839b49fde7dec1c3b2ef471.pdf "Character-Level Language Modeling with Deeper Self-Attention")).

Extending attention, a NN can choose not just which parts of an input to look at multiple times, but also how long to keep computing on it, “adaptive computation” ([Graves 2016a](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/b89e81833c40ec7d99059c213fa9fc4a4be5585d.pdf "Adaptive Computation Time for Recurrent Neural Networks"), [Figurnov et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/3a3fe1e7e248879be20ae690c6ff5574d634644f.pdf "Spatially Adaptive Computation Time for Residual Networks"), Silver et al 2016b, [Zamir et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/d2a51fa164ba73edb0c53e01169292a15d804943.pdf "Feedback Networks"), [Huang et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/4e2630ef5a72226e06bd79a5daeb3d3e1a81d926.pdf "Multi-Scale Dense Convolutional Networks for Efficient Prediction"), [Li et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/1229dffa7a54386c96c08e9b0499c273c9e91a82.pdf "Dynamic Computational Time for Visual Attention"), [Wang et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/534602dc823e0040c626a48fc2ff3990c46f77b3.pdf "IDK Cascades: Fast Deep Learning by Learning not to Overthink"), [Teerapittayanon et al 2017](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/6776/74e81070879f7b6da6261d0ba174985a3cf6.pdf "BranchyNet: Fast Inference via Early Exiting from Deep Neural Networks"), [Huang et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/99e8c71ec3f72edfdb3e933430060ba33336e028.pdf "Learning Policies for Adaptive Tracking with Deep Feature Cascades"), [Li et al 2017b](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/e3e5998dc64071dd5e33a144f1e1bf313b8e3eb0.pdf "Learning with Rethinking: Recurrently Improving Convolutional Neural Networks through Feedback"), [Campos et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/9b9502c4d2cb2b3d56aab7d1d1f54bf33908fe6c.pdf "Skip RNN: Learning to Skip State Updates in Recurrent Neural Networks"), [McGill & Perona 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/382d08ef2c02216e1e99581dcf0475df7af97d0e.pdf "Deciding How to Decide: Dynamic Routing in Artificial Neural Networks"), [Bolukbasi et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/cdd05e2f5960ba8ae26df7898459a6d20fdae336.pdf "Adaptive Neural Networks for Efficient Inference"), [Wu et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/da46237e1466d0c26a987bf2a358f5f2e30a01ca.pdf "BlockDrop: Dynamic Inference Paths in Residual Networks"), [Seo et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/07b7f1eabee158530fa6449c3a1f9cf68ec1f01a.pdf "Neural Speed Reading via Skim-RNN"), [Lieder et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/cec556de17879d66f6a330e0a58fa70c8cacc07b.pdf "Learning to select computations"), [Dehghani et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/99a3451ac520ba33900399a8e11386b157c36ec6.pdf#googledeepmind "Universal Transformers"), [Buesing et al 2019](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/c6c3a0b14611fa97e65ac55e99712fe9beeb27b9.pdf "TreeSample: Approximate Inference in Discrete Distributions with Monte Carlo Tree Search and Value Functions"), [Banino et al 2021](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/2b07b4fecb9f805acf3c3e41828040760a86b4bf.pdf#deepmind "PonderNet: Learning to Ponder")): so it iteratively spends more computation on hard parts of problem within a given computational budget [^8]. [Neural ODEs](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/59e8e403fb6fa0e7fd155ae1cd5efea85891698f.pdf "'Neural Ordinary Differential Equations', Chen et al 2018") are an interesting example of a model which are sort of like adaptive RNNs in that they can be run repeatedly by the ODE solver, adaptively, to refine their output to a target accuracy, and the ODE solver can be considered a kind of agent as well.

Attention generally doesn’t change the nature of the computation aside from the necessity of actions over the input, but actions can be used to bring in different computing paradigms. For example, the entire field of [“differentiable neural computer”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/deepmind.google/b0c1e94edd4149ca423cc8b7783ef9192c63eafc.html "Differentiable neural computers") /“neural Turing machines” ([Zaremba & Sutskever 2015](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/6452068d1ac6645a580b67df6585da752cf66301.pdf "Reinforcement learning neural Turing machines"), [Graves et al 2016b](https://gwern.net/doc/reinforcement-learning/model-free/2016-graves.pdf#deepmind "Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic external memory")) or “neural stack machines” or “neural GPUs” or most designs with some sort of scalable external memory mechanism larger than LSTMs ([Rae et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/19b07628379e61e3e327af30dabdaaca148ffa2f.pdf#deepmind "Scaling Memory-Augmented Neural Networks with Sparse Reads and Writes")) depends on figuring out a clever way to backpropagate through the action of memory accesses or using reinforcement learning techniques like [REINFORCE](https://gwern.net/doc/reinforcement-learning/model-free/1992-williams.pdf "'Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning', Williams 1992") for training the non-differentiable actions. And such a memory is like a database which is constructed on the fly per-problem, so it’ll help with database queries & information retrieval & knowledge graphs ([Narasimhan et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/a17d7df32379441da416e9411b33461aca588bf1.pdf "Improving Information Extraction by Acquiring External Evidence with Reinforcement Learning"), [Seo et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/e688f08bb89dbff4bd9023b493074038ff8447db.pdf "Bidirectional Attention Flow for Machine Comprehension"), [Bachman et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/68d592cc43dab047a30a4bda8ea06c883b09bbeb.pdf "Towards Information-Seeking Agents"), [Buck et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/0d60609401b0cf4756bf8c2da81ea0a8ed7f85a1.pdf "Ask the Right Questions: Active Question Reformulation with Reinforcement Learning"), [Yang et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/72f30b69cfe9976187de87c969b0b196d49df429.pdf "Learning to Organize Knowledge with N-Gram Machines"), [Hadash et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/f94631c161851a492cfc8f31f0d1ffa8e37e65eb.pdf#ibm "Estimate and Replace: A Novel Approach to Integrating Deep Neural Networks with Existing Applications")). An intriguing variant on this idea of ‘querying’ resources is mixture-of-experts ([committee machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Committee_machine "Committee machine")) NN architectures ([Shazeer et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/e2abb4a2655ea83270ac85d46cef6ec25167d7e9.pdf#google "Outrageously large neural networks: the sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer")). [Jeff Dean](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeff_Dean "Jeff Dean") (Google Brain) asks where should we use RL techniques in our OSes, networks, and computations these days and answers: [everywhere](https://gwern.net/doc/www/learningsys.org/0853a10e3f31855199245669a3a6b9afb13ade6c.pdf "'Machine Learning for Systems and Systems for Machine Learning', Dean 2017 slides") ([Haj-Ali et al 2019](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/79740a58b4685d002cd940b0c60c87e45f83dec2.pdf "Deep Reinforcement Learning in System Optimization") review). RL should be used for: program placement on servers ([Mirhoseini et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/d7cd5e2d703d3e5b64247a32f24fe96f8cb9a958.pdf#google "Device Placement Optimization with Reinforcement Learning") / [Mirhoseini et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/pdfs.semanticscholar.org/0494f682eb66a01479380edc9775e9b5d38cba6d.pdf "A Hierarchical Model for Device Placement")), [B-tree indexes](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/6a0f57b7ded2547af49c33ce0a2874dbfc1316c3.pdf "'The Case for Learned Index Structures', Kraska et al 2017") / [Bloom filters](https://gwern.net/doc/www/proceedings.mlr.press/ffc205d2c6c2a415641f822e0c909bd847352e99.pdf "'Meta-Learning Neural Bloom Filters', Rae et al 2019") for [databases](https://gwern.net/doc/www/www.cidrdb.org/712c806cece00b3dcf66e0b49f0dd0d6bc924771.pdf "'SageDB: A Learned Database System', Kraska et al 2019"), [graph partitioning](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/34359d47aaee3d8109e006dfcebb7bf6b18c5975.pdf#google "'GAP: Generalizable Approximate Graph Partitioning Framework', Nazi et al 2019"), search query candidates ([Rosset et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/d0d7e4ae561f25afdf77a9d1a9a069518cc50193.pdf "Optimizing Query Evaluations using Reinforcement Learning for Web Search"), [Nogueira et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/c791c8d8333fc4cd5816433d6cd5d17c87bdd7cb.pdf "Learning to Coordinate Multiple Reinforcement Learning Agents for Diverse Query Reformulation")), compiler settings ([Haj-Ali et al 2019](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/1ded642838f7b6a9e3c92d552993bfa6caeb23df.pdf "AutoPhase: Compiler Phase-Ordering for High Level Synthesis with Deep Reinforcement Learning"), [Trofin et al 2022](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/98466f98010c0ea151a7aab53f846d2f2453612b.pdf#google "MLGO: a Machine Learning Guided Compiler Optimizations Framework")), quantum computer control ([Niu et al 2019](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41534-019-0141-3 "Universal quantum control through deep reinforcement learning")), YouTube [video compression codec](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/4ea550800daddb7d2b610cf9dce5c0ece6b0dd79.pdf#deepmind "'MuZero with Self-competition for Rate Control in VP9 Video Compression', Mandhane et al 2022") settings, datacenter & server cooling controllers… Dean asks “Where Else Could We Use Learning?”, and replies:

> _Anywhere We’re Using Heuristics To Make a Decision!_
> 
> -   Compilers: instruction scheduling, register allocation, loop nest parallelization strategies, …
>     
> -   [Networking](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/58a316c8d20c588ccbc77007e2b46e6501052b7e.pdf#nvidia "‘Reinforcement Learning for Datacenter Congestion Control’, Tessler et al 2021"): TCP window size decisions, backoff for retransmits, data compression, …
>     
> -   Operating systems: process scheduling, buffer cache insertion/replacement \[eg. [Lagar-Cavilla et al 2019](https://lagarcavilla.org/publications/LagarCavillaASPLOS2019.pdf "Software-Defined Far Memory in Warehouse-Scale Computers") for [compressed RAM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_memory_compression "Virtual memory compression")\], file system prefetching \[eg. [Hashemi et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/37166b9e4bf7e4019e8a956e73629fc4edaff8d5.pdf "Learning Memory Access Patterns"), memory allocation ([Maas et al 2020](https://storage.googleapis.com/pub-tools-public-publication-data/pdf/cb7b7a938ac6d313a2b5f07612093b5c52093f51.pdf#google "Learning-based Memory Allocation for C++ Server Workloads"))\], …
>     
> -   Job scheduling systems: which tasks/VMs to co-locate on same machine, which tasks to pre-empt, … \[eg. [Chen & Tian 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/cbd807adec326301fa6af8e1cdd54e2fd77aac4f.pdf "Automatic Local Rewriting for Combinatorial Optimization"), and [mixed integer programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_programming#Integer_unknowns "Linear programming § Integer unknowns") for planning of all sorts ([Nair et al 2020](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/9e0ffaefd6959c9fb4c99a9db7b38e487bb76984.pdf#deepmind "Solving Mixed Integer Programs Using Neural Networks") / [Sonnerat et al 2021](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/d4536b89621c6fcf15f9bdb318863c991efd08cf.pdf#deepmind "Learning a Large Neighborhood Search Algorithm for Mixed Integer Programs"))\]
>     
> -   ASIC design: [physical circuit](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/aa1b1f3a4e2aad423f32d57e9b4b0c388f2d2d00.pdf#google "'Placement Optimization with Deep Reinforcement Learning', Goldie & Mirhoseini 2020") [placement](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/9bdf8b3cf13d3cbbc5b8bc85f91f96b34303c4a9.pdf#google "'Chip Placement with Deep Reinforcement Learning', Mirhoseini et al 2020"), \[[TPU design](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/23400d7471750da67632489d586c76662b0f2e94.pdf#google "'A Full-stack Accelerator Search Technique for Vision Applications', Zhang et al 2021"),\] test case selection, …
>     
> 
> _Anywhere We’ve Punted to a User-Tunable Performance Option!_ Many programs have huge numbers of tunable command-line flags, usually not changed from their defaults (`--eventmanager_threads=16 --bigtable_scheduler_batch_size=8 --mapreduce_merge_memory=134217728` `--lexicon_cache_size=1048576 --storage_server_rpc_freelist_size=128` …)
> 
> _Meta-learn everything_. ML:
> 
> -   learning placement decisions
>     
> -   learning fast kernel implementations
>     
> -   learning optimization update rules
>     
> -   learning input preprocessing pipeline steps
>     
> -   learning activation functions
>     
> -   learning model architectures for specific device types, or that are fast for inference on mobile device X, learning which pre-trained components to reuse, …
>     
> 
> Computer architecture/datacenter networking design:
> 
> -   learning best design properties by exploring design space automatically (via simulator) \[see [Dean 2019](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/d70bf21285239ebdb99fbd35dcb730cbcc62d33b.pdf#google "The Deep Learning Revolution and Its Implications for Computer Architecture and Chip Design")\]
>     

Finally, one interesting variant on this theme is treating an inferential or generative problem as a reinforcement learning problem in a sort of environment with global rewards.

Many times the standard loss function is inapplicable, or the important things are global, or the task is not really well-defined enough (in a “I know it when I see it” sense for the human) to nail down as a simple differentiable loss with predefined labels such as in an image classification problem; in these cases, one cannot do standard supervised training to minimize the loss but must start using reinforcement learning to directly optimize a reward—treating outputs such as classification labels as ‘actions’ which may eventually result in a reward.

For example, in a char-RNN generative text model trained by predicting a character conditional on the previous, one can generative reasonable text samples by [greedily](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greedy_algorithm "Greedy algorithm") picking the most likely next character and occasionally a less likely character for diversity, but one can generate higher quality samples by exploring longer sequences with [beam search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beam_search "Beam search") or nucleus sampling, and one can improve generation further by adding utility functions for global properties & applying RL algorithms such as [Monte Carlo tree search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monte_Carlo_tree_search "Monte Carlo tree search") (MCTS) for training or runtime maximization of an overall trait like translation/summarization quality (sequence-to-sequence problems in general) or winning or program writing (eg. [Jaques et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/openreview.net/86dd89b3e27d9757158edb291c19371a27a37bea.pdf "Tuning Recurrent Neural Networks with Reinforcement Learning [Note-RNN]"), [Norouzi et al 2016](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/hash/2f885d0fbe2e131bfc9d98363e55d1d4-Abstract.html "Reward Augmented Maximum Likelihood for Neural Structured Prediction"), [Wu et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/e97049cf0b24417d921b2f2d17eb8143de17147a.pdf#google "Google's Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation https://research.googleblog.com/2016/09/a-neural-network-for-machine.html"), [Ranzato et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/4cc8e0d70651339b2718335eeed89b310c919d58.pdf#facebook "Sequence level training with recurrent neural networks"), [Li et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/d1a311f75525c495e12be8a2bd2836672429512c.pdf "Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dialogue Generation"), [Silver et al 2016a](https://gwern.net/doc/reinforcement-learning/model/alphago/2016-silver.pdf#deepmind "Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search [AlphaGo]") / [Silver et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/reinforcement-learning/model/alphago/2017-silver.pdf#deepmind "Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge"), [Silver et al 2016b](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/b3df4e7c53080e17d92e7b65b2438c1256108050.pdf#deepmind "The Predictron: End-To-End Learning and Planning"), [Clark & Manning 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/55ec17a3d8b745f812fbc2a40b72fa9ec2c72138.pdf "Deep Reinforcement Learning for Mention-Ranking Coreference Models"), [Miao & Blunsom 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/b9f3c8d41c12eda8a35510cbd2a91b629daa9993.pdf "Language as a Latent Variable: Discrete Generative Models for Sentence Compression"), [Rennie et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/4bc5064823d4218bf462662a8a1637be76dcd353.pdf "Self-critical Sequence Training for Image Captioning"), [He et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/proceedings.neurips.cc/66ad1078d4bc3a5c9f875ca23bd51b1edd695787.pdf "Dual Learning for Machine Translation"), [Bello et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/openreview.net/5949e9321e7d93bebb5058a23cb9b09c1acd19eb.pdf "Neural Combinatorial Optimization With Reinforcement Learning"), [Yang et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/df8e0df8a3e90b94741f6cc8937334ec3b749f80.pdf "Improving Neural Machine Translation with Conditional Sequence Generative Adversarial Nets"), [Strub et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/d5f77a611afd025481b92468126558a417f630ed.pdf "End-to-end optimization of goal-driven and visually grounded dialogue systems"), [Wu et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/5baca4f6f9065dda92c60f82fcfe5d891faafc80.pdf "Adversarial Machine Translation"), [Sestorain et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/b2b102770dd70ff1ad9866144245127481609caa.pdf "Zero-Shot Dual Machine Translation"), [Xie et al 2012](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/85970856d34b7105135743caec0bb9105293e9e5.pdf "Artist Agent: A Reinforcement Learning Approach to Automatic Stroke Generation in Oriental Ink Painting [sumi-e]"), [Prestwich et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/612c8e0bd12c6ff11ff38403f8d46b2e77cf7761.pdf "Stochastic Constraint Programming as Reinforcement Learning"), [Paulus et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/2e809e6e6d425cbb45a4936f41704d4d4c7a2661.pdf "A Deep Reinforced Model for Abstractive Summarization"), [Guimaraes et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/7dc577d310ca737e24372354b5dc4e9cd1247c00.pdf "Objective-Reinforced Generative Adversarial Networks (ORGAN) for Sequence Generation Models"), [Lewis et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/s3.amazonaws.com/6f3f9ee29925c4b4f2f1336ad9f0de9877e4683e.pdf "Deal or No Deal? End-to-End Learning for Negotiation Dialogues"), [Sakaguchi et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/bd7a8403a7f623339e69c8be8faff7cedb8e7158.pdf "Grammatical Error Correction with Neural Reinforcement Learning"), [Supancic III & Ramanan 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/6a12db9f8d2b2209173e76adb3bd5782c0b48452.pdf "Tracking as Online Decision-Making: Learning a Policy from Streaming Videos with Reinforcement Learning"), [Pasunuru & Bansai 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/dfa4428913bf1f2eb69ed4a2138fd7e2296f83b0.pdf "Reinforced Video Captioning with Entailment Rewards"), [Zhong et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/84c71647917e2c79b728306c565e2ce43f99b029.pdf "Seq2SQL: Generating Structured Queries from Natural Language using Reinforcement Learning"), [Kato & Shinozaki](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/92f28566af031904c0f792a4a8423f0a24b6274b.pdf "Reinforcement Learning of Speech Recognition System Based on Policy Gradient and Hypothesis Selection"), [Molla 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/5faf61f85adeb2310c5d982e7f2581bf8fdc9294.pdf "Towards the Use of Deep Reinforcement Learning with Global Policy For Query-based Extractive Summarisation"), [Chang et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/8dae4180dc0b610b193c93e6096abde4565c3549.pdf "Automatically Composing Representation Transformations as a Means for Generalization"), [Kryściński et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/0f60ad7a49992f5ca65520f1007940a9b16feb99.pdf "Improving Abstraction in Text Summarization"), [Wu et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/63c14ab477eb17efac5741aaeb971d45e8d7643f.pdf "A Study of Reinforcement Learning for Neural Machine Translation"), [Hashimoto & Tsuruoka 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/829e82b2e956721a58e027a91f8ae12659832c27.pdf "Accelerated Reinforcement Learning for Sentence Generation by Vocabulary Prediction"), [Krishnan et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/b529739d05ea6b2c6ddb3f8072ae575623bc9621.pdf "Learning to Optimize Join Queries With Deep Reinforcement Learning"), [Sabour et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/31360e724d9c08ac30b64f826935c29ee17a719b.pdf "Optimal Completion Distillation for Sequence Learning"), [Böhm et al 2019](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/eaaf160d6720e9808c64bfc7e4104e31750e6fe9.pdf "Better Rewards Yield Better Summaries: Learning to Summarise Without References"), [Ziegler et al 2019](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/92d4d6d62d6e5919474a9844866bd81edfe25cd1.pdf#openai "Fine-Tuning Language Models from Human Preferences")).

Most exotically, the loss function can itself be a sort of action/RL setting—consider the close connections ([Finn et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/91e0c0dba50b88aa79d1e2040e77abd5d523f037.pdf "A connection between generative adversarial networks, inverse reinforcement learning, and energy-based models"), [Ho & Ermon 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/938df672dbd46add25c19ea31ee10f8714e6ba58.pdf "Generative adversarial imitation learning"), [Pfau & Vinyals 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/839843b735898227c253ff34632e245b6704f78a.pdf "Connecting Generative Adversarial Networks and Actor-Critic Methods"), [Im et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/f21ca96b58693f1dded46bc75d3031c5e6ea021d.pdf "Generative Adversarial Parallelization"), [Goodfellow 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/c2b4b91a630441e012c1c27d0f5e557ec2d43266.pdf "NIPS 2016 Tutorial: Generative Adversarial Networks")) between [actor-critic](https://gwern.net/doc/www/incompleteideas.net/00f4271b34ca93c5092109ad6260788728b4d3e4.html "'6.6 Actor-Critic Methods', Sutton & Barto") reinforcement learning, [synthetic gradients](https://cnichkawde.github.io/SyntheticGradients.html "Asynchronous network architecture for semi-supervised learning") ([Jaderberg et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/16fa087ee67e8e303ec40156ce56cabdf23b1a0d.pdf#deepmind "Decoupled Neural Interfaces using Synthetic Gradients")), and game-theory-based generative adversarial networks (GANs; [Kim et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/2dd18910e952e7c55876b19c5aec683a54250d53.pdf "Learning to Discover Cross-Domain Relations with Generative Adversarial Networks"), [Zhu et al 2017](https://junyanz.github.io/CycleGAN/ "Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation using Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Networks") / [Lample et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/36e66ad66cb96f584bb03f896c0c3f2bdc60d0b5.pdf "Unsupervised Machine Translation Using Monolingual Corpora Only")).

### Actions Internal to Training

The training of a NN by [stochastic gradient descent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stochastic_gradient_descent "Stochastic gradient descent") might seem to be independent of any considerations of ‘actions’, but it turns to be another domain where you can go “what if we treated this as a [MDP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markov_decision_process "Markov decision process")?” and it’s actually useful.

Specifically, gradient descent requires selection of which data to put into a minibatch, how large a change to make to parameters in general based on the error in the current minibatch (the learning rate hyperparameter), or how much to update each individual parameter each minibatch (perhaps having some neurons which get tweaked much less than others).

Actions are things like selecting 1 out of _n_ possible minibatches to do gradient descent on, or selecting 1 out of _n_ possible learning rates with the learning rate increasing/decreasing over time ([Li & Malik 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/8a3728954c72622d96bd5aed8767d25e18669fc1.pdf "Learning to Optimize"), [Li & Malik 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/6a77d9c91d5b74469f79a4db33702bac5c33f2b4.pdf "Learning to Optimize Neural Nets") [Andrychowicz et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/8624100608a0693a8741ca8c9f6891aaf60b7688.pdf "Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient descent"), [Bello et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/proceedings.mlr.press/170a3ea210d3b3df33bd716e2edaf7ce0aa73d7b.pdf "Neural Optimizer Search with Reinforcement Learning"), [Fu et al 2016](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/737f/6cc6e237902531e8047cc12f7f46a4bff282.pdf "Deep Reinforcement Learning for Accelerating the Convergence Rate"), [Xu et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/openreview.net/50a9355a7a1c40e69061ac0963389f3ca2159e26.pdf "An Actor-Critic Algorithm for Learning Rate Learning"), Jaderberg et al 2016, [Wichrowska et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/7b7f940e62b01d1ebac649e197661a7a8f03e932.pdf "Learned Optimizers that Scale and Generalize"), [Hamrick et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/57adf67f3d5d23f33387e87c843af55dfb58b15f.pdf "Metacontrol for Adaptive Imagination-Based Optimization"), [Xu et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/5b0b4822bd651accf1f419501c783be6a78456ea.pdf "Reinforcement Learning for Learning Rate Control"), [Meier et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/524229e958f2d322bbe9c5db572c17b6fcd7573f.pdf "Online Learning of a Memory for Learning Rates"), [Faury & Vasile 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/a2f1b4377bf9e2dd23b1ac2ac21003fa680888d8.pdf "Rover Descent: Learning to optimize by learning to navigate on prototypical loss surfaces"), [Alber et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/0de36d72af6593e9a4b745801cf8b707e1a4d36d.pdf "Backprop Evolution"), [Metz et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/1004e9830ede8a176072ae3ea337372d2b6c1f61.pdf "Learned optimizers that outperform SGD on wall-clock and validation loss"), [Almeida et al 2021](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/2648cf6dec6df67360eb2e7c3851f3fb4f103a01.pdf#openai "A Generalizable Approach to Learning Optimizers"); prioritized traces, prioritized experience replay, boosting, hard-negative mining, [importance sampling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Importance_sampling "Importance sampling") ([Katharopoulos & Fleuret 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/3cc8d0e350e339ac035cb89137727ee463bd0425.pdf "Biased Importance Sampling for Deep Neural Network Training")), prioritizing hard samples, [Loshchilov & Hutter 2015](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/fae408ae5843872ec6c2e2254ece6861828f04b8.pdf "Online Batch Selection for Faster Training of Neural Networks"), [Fan et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/openreview.net/423bcfa53d9b3e2a22b5a134ded2e283fc0b291f.pdf "Neural Data Filter for Bootstrapping Stochastic Gradient Descent"), [Salehi et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/eb13263742f08509cd95485b591bf6b8d22bbc96.pdf "Stochastic Optimization with Bandit Sampling"), [Kim & Choi 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/1551ec6cb2b49790bdcdd9484cd723846b2ddf43.pdf "ScreenerNet: Learning Curriculum for Neural Networks"), learning internal normalizations, [Luo et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/815688ec6783c13e8bcc9340ab9776d98243262b.pdf "Differentiable Learning-to-Normalize via Switchable Normalization")).

### Actions Internal to Data Selection

We have previously looked at sampling from existing datasets: training on hard samples, and so on.

One problem with existing datasets is that they can be inefficient—perhaps they have class imbalance problems where some kinds of data are overrepresented and what is really needed for improved performance is more of the other kinds of data. An image classification CNN doesn’t need 99 dog photos & 1 cat photos, it wants 50 dog photos & 50 cat photos. (Quite aside from the fact that there’s not enough information to classify other cat photos based on just 1 exemplar, the CNN will simply learn to always classify photos as ‘dog’.)

One can try to fix this by [choosing predominately from the minority classes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oversampling_and_undersampling_in_data_analysis "Oversampling and undersampling in data analysis"), or by changing the loss function to make classifying the minority class correctly much more valuable than classifying the majority class.

Even better is if the NN can somehow ask for new data, be given additional/corrected data when it makes a mistake, or even create new data (possibly based on old data: [Cubuk et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/95bcd9186876e23bdc4333bf011076484bb3a64b.pdf#google "AutoAugment: Learning Augmentation Policies from Data")). This leads us to [active learning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_learning_\(machine_learning\) "Active learning (machine learning)"): given possible additional datapoints (such as a large pool of unlabeled datapoints), the NN can ask for the datapoint which it will learn the most from ([Houlsby et al 2011](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/b473d1ec57b9491191375466f42af690bfaed7e2.pdf "Bayesian Active Learning for Classification and Preference Learning"), [Islam 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/raw.githubusercontent.com/41cc1ed0e2e1ca39190300331f08f2f21aaa66ac.pdf "Active Learning for High Dimensional Inputs using Bayesian Convolutional Neural Networks"), [Gal 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/www.cs.ox.ac.uk/c4747ce5b010871beedb6abf250b2609a3695ee2.pdf "Uncertainty in Deep Learning"), [Ling & Fidler 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/a2a5a477d317c2fb1c0b499fac349f6eed4bb7d0.pdf "Teaching Machines to Describe Images via Natural Language Feedback"), [Christiano et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/b673ccf3b1442a783b018b44d57f98f1302b76f7.pdf#openai "Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences"), [Sener & Savarese 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/8848c4de1704f4fd122df1357e0b309795d18928.pdf "A Geometric Approach to Active Learning for Convolutional Neural Networks"), [Shim et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/45becae7ef1ce8a875c2c99165351e95de6617dd.pdf "Why Pay More When You Can Pay Less: A Joint Learning Framework for Active Feature Acquisition and Classification"), [Janisch et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/a2ad7146877bd2c8ea1fa2131f2183df065049c7.pdf "Classification with Costly Features using Deep Reinforcement Learning"), [Pang et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/c33134080a23aafb99129b8ff5a35daf55e740e8.pdf "Meta-Learning Transferable Active Learning Policies by Deep Reinforcement Learning")). One could, for example, train a RL agent to query a search engine and select the most useful images/videos for learning a classification task (eg. YouTube: [Yeung et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/489229279a1a5ab0a02c631e1de3dccb82948c3c.pdf "Learning to Learn from Noisy Web Videos")). We can think of it as a little analogous to how kids [^9] ask parents not random questions, but ones they’re most unsure about, with the most implications one way or another.

[Settles 2010](https://gwern.net/doc/www/burrsettles.com/28ddbada5da6ba1459d640121430f6310a38b4fb.pdf "Active Learning Literature Survey") discusses the practical advantages to machine learning algorithms of careful choice of data points to learn from or ‘label’, and gives some of the known theoretical results on how large the benefits can be—on a toy problem, an error rate _e_ decreasing in sample count from 𝒪(1⧸ε) to 𝒪(log(1⧸ε)), or in a Bayesian setting, a decrease of 𝒪(_d_ ⧸ε) to 𝒪(_d_ × log(1⧸ε)).[^10] Another way to think of it is [“machine teaching”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/134b7010ea0d80753e0ef6711a27e038bf03c6ac.pdf "‘Machine Teaching for Bayesian Learners in the Exponential Family’, Zhu 2013") / [“dataset distillation”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/2f51bf98d7a5823834d85300667009dcd7f74a87.pdf "'Dataset Distillation', Wang et al 2018"): if you want to draw a [decision boundary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decision_boundary "Decision boundary"), the optimal amount of data to define a line is 2 points (draw the line between); with the optimal 3 points, you can draw a quadratic curve; with 4, you can define a cubic, and so on—so with the optimal data (rather than randomly sampled data), you may be able to do seemingly impossible things like learn to classify _n_ classes [with < _n_ datapoints](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/0a44aa7a7f3c50768a72a8689abe37306218ffd5.pdf "‘\"Less Than One\"-Shot Learning: Learning <em>n</em> Classes From <em>M</em> < <em>N</em> Samples’, Sucholutsky & Schonlau 2020") (see also [Maloney et al 2022](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/fb60db4b79f49ed3e7ae7238334293702f3850b2.pdf "A Solvable Model of Neural Scaling Laws")).

Active learning also connects back, from a machine learning perspective, to some of the statistical areas covering the benefits of adaptive/sequential trials—optimal experiments query the most uncertain aspects, which the most can be learned from.

### Actions Internal to NN Design

> I suspect that less than 10 years from now, all of the DL training/architecture tricks that came from the arXiv firehose over 2015 – 4 2019 will have been entirely superseded by automated search techniques. The future: no alchemy, just clean APIs, and quite a bit of compute.
> 
> [François Chollet](https://gwern.net/doc/www/localhost/26e4889732cd985206096ecf31885f9156fda268.html "Chollet 2026"), 2019-01-7

Moving on to more familiar territory, we have [hyperparameter optimization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperparameter_optimization "Hyperparameter optimization") using random search or grid search or Bayesian [Gaussian processes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaussian_process "Gaussian process") to try training a possible NN, observe interim ([Swersky et al 2014](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/72e896bab134e8a2975d173e3caad90a078a365e.pdf "Freeze-Thaw Bayesian Optimization")) and final performance, and look for better hyperparameters.

But if “hyperparameters are parameters we don’t know how to learn yet”, then we can see the rest of neural network architecture design as being hyperparameters too: what is the principled difference between setting a [dropout](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dilution_\(neural_networks\) "Dilution (neural networks)") rate and setting the number of NN layers? Or between setting a learning rate schedule and the width of NN layers or the number of convolutions or what kind of pooling operators are used?

There is none; they are all hyperparameters, just that usually we feel it is too difficult for hyperparameter optimization algorithms to handle many options and we limit them to a small set of key hyperparameters and use “grad student descent” to handle the rest of the design.

So… what if we used powerful algorithms (viz. neural networks) to design compiled code, neural activations, units like LSTMs, or entire architectures ([Zoph & Le 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/95e9b4c48d58ae7bf37b2770ff5014b5c38bb82f.pdf#google "Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning"), [Baker et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/129ed7dcd951f6f5bcd68b7d59df9484f0c2dc00.pdf "Designing Neural Network Architectures using Reinforcement Learning [MetaQNN]"), [Chen et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/d1a4ae4ddd3fc5ddde2129d6baff6ad028c71d93.pdf#deepmind "Learning to learn without gradient descent by gradient descent"), [Duan et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/61270d3bd338d8ad4151cc315464e97dbfe2279b.pdf#openai "RL^2^: Fast Reinforcement Learning via Slow Reinforcement Learning"), [Wang et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/52102d0b2f486d0b5e6eaeb0604ae3ea91a74716.pdf#deepmind "Learning to reinforcement learn"), [Castronovo 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/orbi.uliege.be/8573d23bfa334ac53e2a92e37b50937837ab02dd.pdf "Approximate Bayes Optimal Policy Search using Neural Networks"), [Ha et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/12a3106bd7fb874b58e44d8fdeabd52f2a1768d2.pdf#google "HyperNetworks"), [Fernando et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/0382c4c667026b7479e78e247257980ee7fcbd3b.pdf#deepmind "PathNet: Evolution Channels Gradient Descent in Super Neural Networks"), [Ravi & Larochelle 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/openreview.net/e1d868f7dfb7923f6aa0b77bb49ba31859ecec60.pdf#twitter "Optimization as a Model for Few-Shot Learning"), [Yoo et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/cd4ff48cfc23f99d985fcd157283b8cc8e029cb8.pdf "Efficient K-Shot Learning with Regularized Deep Networks"), [Negrinho & Gordon 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/fe2aea9a3b7d413a2a363b88dc06eda3e070aaaa.pdf "DeepArchitect: Automatically Designing and Training Deep Architectures"), [Miikkulainen et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/40b8c0a0c7b22aaa8d0418b2ff22ace6eb1f79d8.pdf "Evolving Deep Neural Networks"), [Real et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/20f113a61fb641e53751540710a96cb93c216706.pdf "Large-Scale Evolution of Image Classifiers"), [Hu et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/bf4367404485ad1b6945d2e655d01eb94d54e3f6.pdf "Learning to Reason: End-to-End Module Networks for Visual Question Answering"), [Johnson et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/9a2415f79f7ddb4724d9f36b56e9f4ac3bcf8a89.pdf "Inferring and Executing Programs for Visual Reasoning"), [Veniat & Denoyer 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/80d57f4567d563b4ca838d78c435b44c2be5cfc2.pdf "Learning Time-Efficient Deep Architectures with Budgeted Super Networks"), [Munkhdalai & Yu 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/dc42eb28c37fb5e8b5dd472b942c6bc6095149f8.pdf "Meta Networks"), [Cai et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/fc9cd4c4b59d4df2f3c76ad005bc9c63960812e3.pdf "Reinforcement Learning for Architecture Search by Network Transformation"), [Zoph et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/73d144967259fb05e8689339a19725819a1ee1c6.pdf#google "Learning Transferable Architectures for Scalable Image Recognition"), [Brock et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/6b21f7550ce5b1a98b3bb11334907cd672bfe35d.pdf "SMASH: One-Shot Model Architecture Search through HyperNetworks"), [Zhong et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/c28bc2c719291c428fb356123438b736ec357108.pdf "Practical Network Blocks Design with Q-Learning"), [Ashok et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/901ae85c11678e04bafa80e3c221cf75bd3079ba.pdf "N2N Learning: Network to Network Compression via Policy Gradient Reinforcement Learning"), [Ebrahimi et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/e5e2f46d2000699c55469076b074b011315a3ffa.pdf "Gradient-free Policy Architecture Search and Adaptation"), [Ramachandran et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/c54ec338a8a909af0e4c736233896ceff5ee2e45.pdf#google "Searching for Activation Functions"), [Anonymous 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/a2b0e2862089d6c8706ffdc877e416588737968e.pdf#google "Intriguing Properties of Adversarial Examples"), [Wistuba 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/3379aad1962160596b6cce09a37f80ca63265e3f.pdf "Finding Competitive Network Architectures Within a Day Using UCT"), [Schrimpf et al 2017](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/130f090a76a5774c4708cff74bcbfd9b86f5b2b7.pdf "A Flexible Approach to Automated RNN Architecture Generation"), [Huang et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/18d45942551cbf34127c0d45b86dd1b82577b752.pdf "Learning to Prune Filters in Convolutional Neural Networks"), [Real et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/93a11cf134e9331603406c6a1c1126983988e0b9.pdf "Regularized Evolution for Image Classifier Architecture Search"), [Vasilache et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/fe185479da47eed1b263d87e2a73d0d9bc316856.pdf "Tensor Comprehensions: Framework-Agnostic High-Performance Machine Learning Abstractions"), [Elsken et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/368a292c907d4a7c809d9b58946ab28ea0900d8c.pdf "Multi-objective Architecture Search for CNNs"), [Chen et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/65276a4d208e6c777ebb574916787b0a52876b3b.pdf "Learning to Optimize Tensor Programs"), [Zhou et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/82c4a9a1d4507bd17247c81bea9f90f781fc439c.pdf "RENA: Resource-Efficient Neural Architect"), [Zela et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/71434ce3aee3be52649be96a0bb0447f59d2d3c0.pdf "Towards Automated Deep Learning: Efficient Joint Neural Architecture and Hyperparameter Search"), [Tan et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/17c04c96e239a15345c11458d00a25185244f9cc.pdf "MnasNet: Platform-Aware Neural Architecture Search for Mobile"), [Chen et al 2018a](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/d780a4bad118d2915b8a62349eb4cc6b44319806.pdf "Searching for Efficient Multi-Scale Architectures for Dense Image Prediction"), [Cheng et al 2018b](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/a9f865e37cab27f6fca0c53dcfa0c3b56fcb041a.pdf "Searching Toward Pareto-Optimal Device-Aware Neural Architectures"), [Anonymous 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/openreview.net/e2883e4010ed186c7e3f7405a2736585e815b32a.pdf "Evolutionary-Neural Hybrid Agents for Architecture Search"), [Cheng et al 2018c](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/47ad7f57a91a9699d216550f4372599eda9ca920.pdf "InstaNAS: Instance-aware Neural Architecture Search"), [Guo et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/63a2f303b00355d8761e50c25c459dce3c0fe122.pdf "IRLAS: Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Architecture Search"), [Cai et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/8ce42a3d6df00ddf0dfef0a180ff4134d9d8d303.pdf "ProxylessNAS: Direct Neural Architecture Search on Target Task and Hardware"), [So et al 2019](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/6bdd3569ab2a5ccf4cde540feab4a1162054e493.pdf#google "The Evolved Transformer"), [Ghiasi et al 2019](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/8aee699559e732520c57056888f218c0520f4769.pdf "NAS-FPN: Learning Scalable Feature Pyramid Architecture for Object Detection"), [Tan & Le 2019](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/417166c2f72396389bc4c37b479896d0e991ef17.pdf#google "EfficientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convolutional Neural Networks"), [An et al 2019](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/74c6ed09e3e9ac4be0c0d798fe18d814d5776a99.pdf "StyleNAS: An Empirical Study of Neural Architecture Search to Uncover Surprisingly Fast End-to-End Universal Style Transfer Networks"), [Gupta & Tan 2019](https://research.google/blog/efficientnet-edgetpu-creating-accelerator-optimized-neural-networks-with-automl/ "EfficientNet-EdgeTPU: Creating Accelerator-Optimized Neural Networks with AutoML"), [Piergiovanni et al 2018](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/54c58826184104ae6ef634e96edd715067557853.pdf "Evolving Space-Time Neural Architectures for Videos"))?

The logical extension of these “neural networks all the way down” papers is that an actor like Google/Baidu/Facebook/MS could effectively turn NNs into a black box: a user/developer uploads through an API a dataset of input/output pairs of a specified [type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_system "Type system") and a monetary loss function, and a top-level NN running on a large GPU cluster starts autonomously optimizing over architectures & hyperparameters for the NN design which balances GPU cost and the monetary loss, interleaved with further optimization over the thousands of previous submitted tasks, sharing its learning across all of the datasets/loss functions/architectures/hyperparameters, and the original user simply submits future data through the API for processing by the best NN so far. (Google and Facebook have already taken steps toward this using distributed hyperparameter optimization services which benefit from transfer learning across tasks; [Google Vizier](https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en//pubs/archive/46180.pdf "'Google Vizier: A Service for Black-Box Optimization', Golovin et al 2017"), [FBLearner Flow](https://engineering.fb.com/2016/05/09/core-infra/introducing-fblearner-flow-facebook-s-ai-backbone/ "'Introducing FBLearner Flow: Facebook's AI backbone', Dunn 2016").)

### Actions External to the Agent

Finally, we come to actions in environments which aren’t purely virtual. Adaptive experiments, multi-armed bandits, reinforcement learning etc. will outperform any purely supervised learning.

For example, [AlphaGo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AlphaGo "AlphaGo") trained as a pure supervised-learning Tool AI, predicting next moves of human Go games in a [KGS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KGS_Go_Server "KGS Go Server") dataset, but that was only a prelude to the self-play, which boosted it from professional player to superhuman level; aside from replacing loss functions (a classification loss like log loss vs victory), the AlphaGo NNs were able to explore tactics and positions that never appeared in the original human dataset.

The rewards can also help turn an unsupervised problem (what is the structure or label of each frame of a video game?) into more of a [semi-supervised](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weak_supervision "Weak supervision § Semi-supervised learning") problem by providing some sort of meaningful summary: the reward. A DQN Atari Learning Environment (ALE) agent will, without any explicit image classification, learn to recognize & predict objects in a game which are relevant to achieving a high score.

## Overall

So to put it concretely: CNNs with adaptive computations will be computationally faster for a given accuracy rate than fixed-iteration CNNs, CNNs with attention classify better than CNNs without attention, CNNs with focus over their entire dataset will learn better than CNNs which only get fed random images, CNNs which can ask for specific kinds of images do better than those querying their dataset, CNNs which can trawl through Google Images and locate the most informative one will do better still, CNNs which access rewards from their user about whether the result was useful will deliver more relevant results, CNNs whose hyperparameters are automatically optimized by an RL algorithm (and possibly trained directly by a NN) will perform better than CNNs with handwritten hyperparameters, CNNs whose architecture as well as standard hyperparameters are designed by RL agents will perform better than handwritten CNNs… and so on. (It’s actions all the way down.)

The drawback to all this is the implementation difficulty is higher, the sample efficiency can be better or worse (individual parts will have greater sample-efficiency but data will be used up training the additional flexibility of other parts), and the computation requirements for training can be much higher; but the asymptotic performance is better, and the gap probably grows as GPUs & datasets get bigger and tasks get more difficult & valuable in the real world.

## Why You Shouldn’t Be A Tool

Why does treating all these levels as decision or reinforcement learning problems help so much?

One answer is that most points are not near any decision boundary, or are highly predictable and contribute little information. Optimizing explorations can often lead to prediction/classification/inference gains. These points need not be computed extensively, nor trained on much, nor collected further. If a particular combination of variables is already being predicted with high accuracy (perhaps because it’s common), adding even an infinite number of additional samples will do little; one sample from an unsampled region far away from the previous samples may be dramatically informative. A model trained on purely supervised data collected from humans or experts may have huge gaping holes in its understanding, because most of its data will be collected from routine use and will not sample many regions of state-space, leading to well-known brittleness and bizarre extrapolations, caused by precisely the fact that the humans/experts avoid the dumbest & most catastrophic mistakes and those situations are not represented in the dataset at all! (Thus, a Tool AI might be ‘safe’ in the sense that it is not an agent, but very unsafe because it is dumb as soon as it goes outside of routine use.) Such flaws in the discriminative model would be exposed quickly in any kind of real world or competitive setting or by RL training.[^11] You need the _right_ data, not more data. (“39. Re graphics: A picture is worth 10K words—but only those to describe the picture. Hardly any sets of 10K words can be adequately described with pictures.”)

Another answer is the “curse of dimensionality”: in many environments, the tree of possible actions and subsequent rewards grows exponentially, so any sequence of actions over more than a few timesteps is increasingly unlikely to ever be sampled, and sparse rewards will be increasingly likely to be observed. Even if an important trajectory is executed at random and a reward obtained, it will be equally unlikely to ever be executed again—whereas some sort of RL agent, whose beliefs affect its choice of actions, can sample the important trajectory repeatedly, and rapidly converge on an estimate of its high value and continue exploring more deeply.

A dataset of randomly generated sequences of robot arm movements intended to grip an object would likely include no rewards (successful grips) at all, because it requires a long sequence of finely calibrated arm movements; with no successes, how could the tool AI learn to manipulate an arm? It must be able to make progress by testing its best arm movement sequence candidate, then learn from that and test the better arm movement, and so on, until it succeeds. Without any rewards or ability to hone in good actions, only the initial states will be observed and progress will be extremely slow compared to an agent who can take actions and explore novel parts of the environment (eg. the problem of [_Montezuma’s Revenge_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montezuma%27s_Revenge_\(video_game\) "Montezuma’s Revenge (video game)") in the Atari Learning Environment: because of reward sparsity, an epsilon-greedy might as well not be an agent compared to some better method of exploring like density-estimation in [Bellemare et al 2016](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/0edb5b37674dcd323f856b64a93de2ecedd1ad5c.pdf#deepmind "Unifying Count-Based Exploration and Intrinsic Motivation").)

Or imagine training a Go program by creating a large dataset of randomly generated Go boards, then evaluating each possible move’s value by playing out a game between random agents from it; this would not work nearly as well as training on actual human-generated board positions which target the vanishingly small set of high-quality games & moves. The exploration homes in on the exponentially shrinking optimal area of the movement tree based on its current knowledge, discarding the enormous space of bad possible moves. In contrast, a tool AI cannot lift itself up by its bootstraps. It merely gives its best guess on the static current dataset, and that’s that. If you don’t like the results, you can gather more data, but it probably won’t help that much because you’ll give it more of what it already has.

Hence, being a secret agent is much better than being a tool.

## External Links

-   Discussion:
    
    -   [HN](https://gwern.net/doc/www/news.ycombinator.com/ffb71c6407d0e53fa34ca87bc72a15110d6702ff.html)
        
    -   [Reddit](https://gwern.net/doc/www/old.reddit.com/9b214dbe4fb6fc775ce24e475e2985d361836c90.html)
        
-   [“Mesa-optimization: Risks from Learned Optimization: Introduction”](https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/FkgsxrGf3QxhfLWHG/risks-from-learned-optimization-introduction "Risks from Learned Optimization: Introduction")
    
-   [“On Learning to Think: Algorithmic Information Theory for Novel Combinations of Reinforcement Learning Controllers and Recurrent Neural World Models”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/b85a4e82b077f63433d9694332c2407e7e0f9e02.pdf "'On Learning to Think: Algorithmic Information Theory for Novel Combinations of Reinforcement Learning Controllers and Recurrent Neural World Models', Schmidhuber 2015"), Schmidhuber 2015 11ya; [“One Big Net for Everything”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/2f1937f3dc1828a15a1c2e642fa2141efb6c7e5b.pdf "'One Big Net For Everything', Schmidhuber 2018"), Schmidhuber 2018
    
-   [_Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction_](http://www.incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html "'Sutton & Barto Book: Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction', Sutton & Barto 2026"), Sutton & Barto
    
-   [RL subreddit](https://gwern.net/doc/www/old.reddit.com/4af39bdcabcf613916ab4b8077dc0f09e83c2b58.html "'Reddit: Reinforcement Learning subreddit', Reddit 2026")
    
-   [“Learning to Learn”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/bair.berkeley.edu/ce7951d18625981a9be05c9bfc1dfacf05a238ab.html), Finn
    
-   [“ _Ist künstliche Motivation gefährlich?_” \[“Is Artificial Motivation Dangerous?”\]](https://gwern.net/doc/www/hci.iwr.uni-heidelberg.de/3684da354c36d3e5274e36b41d76ad4da9196309.pdf), Schmitt 2017
    
-   [“Military AI as a Convergent Goal of Self-Improving AI”](https://philarchive.org/archive/TURMAA-6v2), Turchin 2017
    
-   [“Deep Reinforcement Learning Doesn’t Work Yet”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/www.alexirpan.com/a19996698840ebd637282255eccb6b41d6d3b754.html "Deep Reinforcement Learning Doesn’t Work Yet"), Alex Irpan
    
-   [“The Ethics of Reward Shaping”](https://archives.argmin.net/2018/04/16/ethical-rewards/ "The Ethics of Reward Shaping"), Ben Recht
    
-   [“Google AI Chief Jeff Dean’s ML System Architecture Blueprint”](https://gwern.net/doc/reinforcement-learning/2018-07-26-synced-googleaichiefjeffdeansmlsystemarchitectureblueprint.html): Training/Batch Size/Sparsity and Embeddings/Quantization and Distillation/Networks with Soft Memory/Learning to Learn (L2L)
    
-   [“Solving the Mystery of Link Imbalance: A Metastable Failure State at Scale”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/engineering.fb.com/15231d2bd600174b109cb28f58dc48ca0781d8e0.html "Solving the Mystery of Link Imbalance: A Metastable Failure State at Scale"), Bronson 2014
    
-   [“Reflective Oracles: A Foundation for Classical Game Theory”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/e819aa25f19f5338e344546415167f69e54b5e53.pdf "'Reflective Oracles: A Foundation for Classical Game Theory', Fallenstein et al 2015"), Fallenstein et al 2015
    
-   [“Reframing Superintelligence: Comprehensive AI Services as General Intelligence”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/d733ad7706dd4ef4aa27e7c624ec58cf61c74a5c.pdf), Drexler 2019 (argues that despite the benefits of agency & increasing integration of systems with RL techniques, narrow-domain tool AI will nevertheless win out economically)
    
-   [“The Bitter Lesson”](http://www.incompleteideas.net/IncIdeas/BitterLesson.html "'The Bitter Lesson', Sutton 2019") of AI Research: Compute Beats Clever (Rich Sutton)
    
-   [“AI-GAs: AI-generating algorithms, an alternate paradigm for producing general artificial intelligence”](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/8fea76b2ff6379b574b6f1eb348db27c7b0203f5.pdf#uber "'AI-GAs: AI-generating algorithms, an alternate paradigm for producing general artificial intelligence', Clune 2019"), Clune 2019
    
-   [End-to-end principle](https://gwern.net/doc/cs/end-to-end-principle/index "‘end-to-end’ directory")
    
-   [“There’s plenty of room at the Top: What will drive computer performance after Moore’s law?”](https://gwern.net/doc/cs/hardware/2020-leiserson.pdf "'There’s plenty of room at the Top: What will drive computer performance after Moore’s law?', Leiserson et al 2020"), Leiserson et al 2020
    
-   [“Automation as Colonization Wave”](https://gwern.net/doc/economics/automation/index "‘tech economics’ directory")
    
-   [“Modeling the Human Trajectory”](https://www.openphilanthropy.org/research/modeling-the-human-trajectory/ "'Modeling the Human Trajectory', Roodman 2020") ([paper](https://gwern.net/doc/economics/automation/2020-roodman.pdf "Superexponential")), Roodman 2020
    

## Bibliography

[\[Bibliography of links/references used in page\]](https://gwern.net/metadata/annotation/link-bibliography/%252Ftool-ai.html "Bibliography of links cited in this page (forward citations). Lazily-transcluded version at footer of page for easier scrolling.")

[^1]: _Superintelligence_, pg148: > Even if the oracle itself works exactly as intended, there is a risk that it would be misused. One obvious dimension of this problem is that an oracle AI would be a source of immense power which could give a decisive strategic advantage to its operator. This power might be illegitimate and it might not be used for the common good. Another more subtle but no less important dimension is that the use of an oracle could be extremely dangerous for the operator herself. Similar worries (which involve philosophical as well as technical issues) arise also for other hypothetical castes of superintelligence. We will explore them more thoroughly in Chapter 13. Suffice it here to note that the protocol determining which questions are asked, in which sequence, and how the answers are reported and disseminated could be of great significance. One might also consider whether to try to build the oracle in such a way that it would refuse to answer any question in cases where it predicts that its answering would have consequences classified as catastrophic according to some rough-and-ready criteria.
[^2]: This has since proven to be a serious obstacle to OpenAI’s use of RLHF on GPT-3 & GPT-4: it is very difficult to get sufficiently-high quality human ratings, especially when collected the default way (ie. crowdsourced or from users), and the raters easily fall for material which is copied (eg. in [summarization](https://gwern.net/doc/www/arxiv.org/35c4624c49a78d2ee73a8bdd67cfbc1f527fb333.pdf#openai "‘Learning to summarize from human feedback’, Stiennon et al 2020")), fluent but wrong, beyond their personal knowledge, or requires extensive research (like third-party sources) to fact-check.
[^3]: _Superintelligence_, pg152–153, pg158: > With advances in artificial intelligence, it would become possible for the programmer to offload more of the cognitive labor required to figure out how to accomplish a given task. In an extreme case, the programmer would simply specify a formal criterion of what counts as success and leave it to the AI to find a solution. To guide its search, the AI would use a set of powerful heuristics and other methods to discover structure in the space of possible solutions. It would keep searching until it found a solution that satisfied the success criterion…Rudimentary forms of this approach are quite widely deployed today…A second place where trouble could arise is in the course of the software’s operation. If the methods that the software uses to search for a solution are sufficiently sophisticated, they may include provisions for managing the search process itself in an intelligent manner. In this case, the machine running the software may begin to seem less like a mere tool and more like an agent. Thus, the software may start by developing a plan for how to go about its search for a solution. The plan may specify which areas to explore first and with what methods, what data to gather, and how to make best use of available computational resources. In searching for a plan that satisfies the software’s internal criterion (such as yielding a sufficiently high probability of finding a solution satisfying the user-specified criterion within the allotted time), the software may stumble on an unorthodox idea. For instance, it might generate a plan that begins with the acquisition of additional computational resources and the elimination of potential interrupters (such as human beings). Such “creative” plans come into view when the software’s cognitive abilities reach a sufficiently high level. When the software puts such a plan into action, an existential catastrophe may ensue….The apparent safety of a tool-AI, meanwhile, may be illusory. In order for tools to be versatile enough to substitute for superintelligent agents, they may need to deploy extremely powerful internal search and planning processes. Agent-like behaviors may arise from such processes as an unplanned consequence. In that case, it would be better to design the system to be an agent in the first place, so that the programmers can more easily see what criteria will end up determining the system’s output.
[^4]: As the lead author put it in a [May 2019 talk about REINFORCE on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HEqQ2_1XRTs#google "'Reinforcement Learning for Recommender Systems: A Case Study on Youtube', Chen 2019"), the benefit is not simply better prediction but in superior consideration of downstream effects of all recommendations, which are ignored by predictive models: this produced “The largest single launch improvement in YouTube for two years” because “We can really lead the users toward a different state, versus recommending content that is familiar”.
[^5]: _Superintelligence_, pg151: > It might be thought that by expanding the range of tasks done by ordinary software, one could eliminate the need for artificial general intelligence. But the range and diversity of tasks that a general intelligence could profitably perform in a modern economy is enormous. It would be infeasible to create special-purpose software to handle all of those tasks. Even if it could be done, such a project would take a _long_ time to carry out. Before it could be completed, the nature of some of the tasks would have changed, and new tasks would have become relevant. There would be great advantage to having software that can learn on its own to do new tasks, and indeed to discover new tasks in need of doing. But this would require that the software be able to learn, reason, and plan, and to do so in a powerful and robustly cross-domain manner. In other words, it would need general intelligence. Especially relevant for our purposes is the task of software development itself. There would be enormous practical advantages to being able to automate this. Yet the capacity for rapid self-improvement is just the critical property that enables a seed AI to set off an intelligence explosion.
[^6]: [1844-07-12](https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/16550/pg16550-images.html#Cpage445), “Reminiscences Of Wordsworth” by Lady Richardson, _The Prose Works of William Wordsworth_ v3, ed Grosart 1876 150ya
[^7]: While Google Maps was used as a paradigmatic example of a Tool AI, it’s not clear how hard this can be pushed, even if we exclude the road system itself: Google Maps/Waze is, of course, trying to maximize something—traffic & ad revenue. Google Maps, like any Google property, is doubtless constantly running [A/B tests](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A/B_testing "A/B testing") on its users to optimize for maximum usage, its users are constantly feeding in data about routes & traffic conditions to Google Maps/Waze through the website interface & smartphone GPS/WiFi geographic logs, and to the extent that users make any use of the information & increase/decrease their use of Google Maps which many do so blindly, Google Maps will get feedback after changing the real world (sometimes to the [intense](https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/traffic-weary-homeowners-and-waze-are-at-war-again-guess-whos-winning/2016/06/05/c466df46-299d-11e6-b989-4e5479715b54_story.html "Traffic-weary homeowners and Waze are at war, again. Guess who's winning?") [frustration](https://gwern.net/doc/www/mynewsla.com/822c17c670415fd567c1f7e9ab841cdde153c4d6.html "'Cut-through' traffic caused by Waze app must stop, L.A. councilman says") of [those affected](https://gwern.net/doc/www/nbr.com/77ae4ad181dec464a36698d81c36549844f3a1c9.html "LA residents complain about 'Waze Craze'"), who try to manipulate it back)… Is Google Maps/Waze a Tool AI or a large-scale Agent AI? It is in a [POMDP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partially_observable_Markov_decision_process "Partially observable Markov decision process") environment, it has a clear reward function in terms of website traffic, and it has a wide set of actions it continuously explores with randomization from various sources; even though it was designed to be a Tool AI, from an abstract perspective, one would have to consider it to have evolved into an Agent AI due to its commercial context and use in real-world actions, whether Google likes it or not. We might consider Google Maps to be a “secret agent”: it is not a Tool AI but an Agent AI with a hidden & highly opaque reward function. This is probably not an ideal situation.
[^8]: If the NN is trained to minimize error alone, it’ll simply spend as much time as possible on every problem; so a cost is imposed on each iteration to encourage it to finish as soon as it has a good answer, and learn to finish sooner. And how do we decide what costs to impose on the NN for deciding whether to loop another time or emit its current best guess as good enough? Well, that’ll depend on the cost of GPUs and the economic activity and the utility of results for the humans…
[^9]: [Kyunghyun Cho, 2015](https://gwern.net/doc/www/kyunghyuncho.me/415a798fa1f3d6bade4858ab71ab735aad551407.html "Brief Summary of the Panel Discussion at DL Workshop @ICML 2015"): > One question I remember came from Tieleman. He asked the panelists about their opinions on active learning/exploration as an option for efficient unsupervised learning. Schmidhuber and Murphy responded, and before I reveal their response, I really liked it. In short (or as much as I’m certain about my memory), active exploration will happen naturally as the consequence of rewarding better explanation of the world. Knowledge of the surrounding world and its accumulation should be rewarded, and to maximize this reward, an agent or an algorithm will active explore the surrounding area (even without supervision.) According to Murphy, this may reflect how babies learn so quickly without much supervising signal or even without much unsupervised signal (their way of active exploration compensates the lack of unsupervised examples by allowing a baby to collect high quality unsupervised examples.)
[^10]: For a simple search visualization of the advantage of active learning, which can select the most informative sample, over naive random sampling, see [“Visualizing Active Learning’s Sample-Efficiency Advantage”](https://gwern.net/blog/2022/active-learning "‘Visualizing Active Learning Sample-Efficiency’, Gwern 2022")
[^11]: An example here might be the use of ‘ladders’ or ‘mirroring’ in Go—models trained in a purely supervised fashion on a dataset of Go games can have serious difficulty responding to a ladder or mirror because those strategies are so bad that no human would play them in the dataset. Once the Tool AI has been forced ‘off-policy’, its predictions & inferences may become garbage because it’s never seen anything like those states before; an agent will be better off because it’ll have been forced into them by exploration or adversarial training and have learned the proper responses. This sort of bad behavior leads to quadratically increasing regret with passing time: [Ross & Bagnall 2010](https://gwern.net/doc/www/proceedings.mlr.press/dc282979bb70d96f91b8ca6ad00f91ffd86db99e.pdf "Efficient Reductions for Imitation Learning")
